
But the public goods theory breaks down not only because of the faulty moral reasoning implied in it. Even the utilitarian, economic reasoning contained in the above argument is blatantly wrong. As the public goods theory states, it might well be that it would be better to have the public goods than not to have them, though it should not be forgotten that no a priori reason exists that this must be so of necessity (which would then end the public goods theorists’ reasoning right here). For it is clearly possible, and indeed known to be a fact, that anarchists exist who so greatly abhor state action that they would prefer not having the so-called public goods at all to having them provided by the state.[^16] In any case, even if the argument is conceded so far, to leap from the statement that the public goods are desirable to the statement that they should therefore be provided by the state is anything but conclusive, as this is by no means the choice with which one is confronted. Since money or other resources must be withdrawn from possible alternative uses to finance the supposedly desirable public goods, the only relevant and appropriate question is whether or not these alternative uses to which the money could be put (that is, the private goods which could have been acquired but now cannot be bought because the money is being spent on public goods instead) are more valuable—more urgent—than the public goods. And the answer to this question is perfectly clear. In terms of consumer evaluations, however high its absolute level might be, the value of the public goods is relatively lower than that of the competing private goods because if one had left the choice to the consumers (and had not forced one alternative upon them), they evidently would have preferred spending their money differently (otherwise no force would have been necessary). This proves beyond any doubt that the resources used for the provision of public goods are wasted because they provide consumers with goods or services that at best are only of secondary importance. In short, even if one assumed that public goods that can be distinguished clearly from private goods existed, and even if it were granted that a given public good might be useful, public goods would still compete with private goods. And there is only one method for finding out whether or not they are more urgently desired and to what extent, or *mutatis mutandis*, if, and to what extent, their production would take place at the expense of the nonproduction or reduced production of more urgently needed private goods: by having everything provided by freely competing private enterprises. Hence, contrary to the conclusion arrived at by the public goods theorists, logic forces one to accept the result that only a pure market system can safeguard the rationality, from the point of view of the consumers, of a decision to produce a public good. And only under a pure capitalist order could it be ensured that the decision about how much of a public good to produce (provided it should be produced at all) would be rational as well.[^17] No less than a semantic revolution of truly Orwellian dimensions would be required to come up with a different result. Only if one were willing to interpret someone’s ”no” as really meaning “yes,” the “nonbuying of something” as meaning that it is really “preferred over that which the nonbuying person does instead of nonbuying,” of “force” really meaning “freedom,” of “noncontracting” really meaning “making a contract” and so on, could the public goods theorists’ point be “proven.”[^18] But how then could we be sure that they really mean what they seem to mean when they say what they say, and do not rather mean the exact opposite, or do not mean anything with a definite content at all, but are simply babbling? We could not. Murray N. Rothbard is thus completely right when he comments on the endeavors of the public goods ideologues to prove the existence of so-called market failures due to the nonproduction or a quantitatively or qualitatively “deficient” production of public goods. He writes,


[^16]: See on this argument Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” p. 533\. Incidentally, the existence of one single anarchist also invalidates all references to Pareto optimality as a criterion for economically legitimate state action.

[^17]: Essentially the same reasoning that leads one to reject the socialist-statist theory built on the allegedly unique character of public goods as defined by the criterion of nonexcludability, also applies when, instead, such goods are defined by means of the criterion of nonrivalrous consumption (see notes 6 and 12 above). For one thing, in order to derive the normative statement that they *should* be so offered from the statement of fact that goods that allow nonrivalrous consumption *would not* be offered on the free market to as many consumers as could be, this theory would face exactly the same problem of requiring a justifiable ethics. Moreover, the utilitarian reasoning is blatantly wrong, too. To reason, as the public goods theorists do, that the free-market practice of excluding free riders from the enjoyment of goods that would permit nonrivalrous consumption at zero marginal costs would indicate a suboptimal level of social welfare and hence would require compensatory state action is faulty on two related counts. First, cost is a subjective category and can never be objectively measured by any outside observer. Hence, to say that additional free riders could be admitted at no cost is totally inadmissible. In fact, if the subjective costs of admitting more consumers at no charge were indeed zero, the private owner-producer of the good in question would do so. If he does not do so, this reveals that the costs for him are *not* zero. The reason may be his belief that to do so would reduce the satisfaction available to the other consumers and so would tend to depress the price for his product; or it may simply be his dislike for uninvited free riders as, for instance, when I object to the proposal that I turn over my less-thancapacity-filled living room to various self-inviting guests for nonrivalrous consumption. In any case, since for whatever reason the cost cannot be assumed to be zero, it is then fallacious to speak of a market failure when certain goods are not handed out free of charge. On the other hand, welfare losses would indeed become unavoidable if one accepted the public goods theorists’ recommendation of letting goods that allegedly allow for nonrivalrous consumption to be provided free of charge by the state. Besides the insurmountable task of determining what fulfills this criterion, the state, independent of voluntary consumer purchases as it is, would first off face the equally insoluble problem of rationally determining *how much* of the public good to provide. Clearly, since even public goods are not free goods but are subject to “crowding” at some level of use, there is no stopping point for the state, because at any level of supply there would still be users who would have to be excluded and who, with a larger supply, could enjoy a free ride. But even if this problem could be solved miraculously, in any case the (necessarily inflated) cost of production and operation of the public goods distributed free of charge for nonrivalrous consumption would have to be paid for by taxes. And this then, i.e., the fact that consumers would have been coerced into enjoying their free rides, again proves beyond any doubt that these public goods, too, are of inferior value from the point of view of consumers to the competing private goods that they now no longer can acquire.

[^18]: The most prominent modern champions of Orwellian double talk are Buchanan and Tullock (see their works cited in note 3 above). They claim that government is founded by a “constitutional contract” in which everyone “conceptually agrees” to submit to the coercive powers of government with the understanding that everyone else is subject to it too. Hence government is only *seemingly* coercive but *really* voluntary. There are several evident objections to this curious argument. First, there is no empirical evidence whatsoever for the contention that any constitution has ever been voluntarily accepted by everyone concerned. Worse, the very idea of all people voluntarily coercing themselves is simply inconceivable, much in the same way as it is inconceivable to deny the law of contradiction. For if the voluntarily accepted coercion is voluntary, then it would have to be possible to revoke one’s subjection to the constitution, and the state would be no more than a voluntarily joined club. If, however, one does not have the “right to ignore the state”—and that one does not have this right is, of course, the characteristic mark of a state as compared to a club—then it would be logically inadmissible to claim that one’s acceptance of state coercion is voluntary. Furthermore, even if all this were possible, the constitutional contact could still not claim to bind anyone except the original signers of the constitution.

    How can Buchanan and Tullock come up with such absurd ideas? By a semantic trick. What was “inconceivable” and “no agreement” in pre-Orwellian talk is for them “conceptually possible” and a “conceptual agreement.” For a most instructive short exercise in this sort of reasoning in leaps and bounds, see James Buchanan, “A Contractarian Perspective on Anarchy,” in idem, *Freedom in Constitutional Contract* (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1977). Here we learn (p. l7) that even the acceptance of the 55 mph speed limit is possibly voluntary (Buchanan is not quite sure) since it ultimately rests on all of us conceptually agreeing on the constitution, and that Buchanan is not really a statist, but in truth an anarchist (p. 11).

> [s]uch a view completely economic science asserts that free-market action is *ever* optimal. It is optimal, not from the standpoint of the personal ethical views of an economist, but from the standpoint of free, voluntary actions of all participants and in satisfying the freely expressed needs of the consumers. Government interference, therefore, will necessarily and always move *away* from such an optimum.[^19]

[^19]: Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, p. 887.

Indeed, the arguments supposedly proving market failures are nothing short of patently absurd. Stripped of their disguise of technical jargon all they prove is this: A market is not perfect, as it is characterized by the nonaggression principle imposed on conditions marked by scarcity, and so certain goods or services that could only be produced and provided if aggression were allowed will not be produced. True enough, but no market theorist would ever dare deny this. Yet, and this is decisive, this “imperfection” of the market can be defended, morally as well as economically, whereas the supposed “perfections” of markets propagated by the public goods theorists cannot.[^20] It is also true that a termination of the state’s current practice of providing public goods would imply some change in the existing social structure and the distribution of wealth. Such a reshuffling would certainly imply hardship for some people. As a matter of fact, this is precisely why there is widespread public resistance to a policy of privatizing state functions, even though in the long run overall social wealth would be enhanced by this very policy. Surely, however, this fact cannot be accepted as a valid argument demonstrating the failure of markets. If a man has been allowed to hit other people on the head and is now not permitted to continue with this practice, he is certainly hurt. But one would hardly accept that as a valid excuse for upholding the old (hitting) rules. He is harmed, but harming him means substituting a social order in which every consumer has an equal right to determine what and how much of anything is produced, for a system in which some consumers have the right to determine in what respect other consumers are not allowed to buy voluntarily what they want with the means justly acquired by them and at their disposal. Certainly, such a substitution would be preferable from the point of view of all consumers as voluntary consumers.

[^20]: This, first of all, should be kept in mind whenever one has to assess the validity of statist-interventionist arguments such as the following, by John Maynard Keynes (“The End of Laissez Faire,” in idem, *Collected Writings*, London: Macmillan, 1972, vol. IX, p. 291):

    > The most important Agenda of the state relates not to those activities which private individuals are already fulfilling but to those functions which fall outside the sphere of the individual, to those decisions which are made by no one if the state does not make them. The important thing for government is not to do things which individuals are doing already and to do them a little better or a little worse: but to do those things which are not done at all.

    This reasoning not only *appears* phony, it truly is.

By force of logical reasoning, one must accept Molinari’s conclusion that for the sake of consumers, all goods and services be provided by markets.[^21] It is not only false that clearly distinguishable categories of goods exist, which would render special amendments to the general thesis of capitalism’s economic superiority necessary; even if they did exist, no special reason could be found why these supposedly special public goods should not also be produced by private enterprises, since they invariably stand in competition with private goods. In fact, in spite of all the propaganda from the public goods theorists, the greater efficiency of markets as compared with the state is increasingly realized with respect to more and more of the alleged public goods. Confronted daily with experience, hardly anyone seriously studying these matters could deny that nowadays markets could produce postal services, railroads, electricity, telephone, education, money, roads and so on more effectively than the state, i.e., more to the liking of consumers. Yet people generally shy away from accepting in one particular sector what logic forces upon them: in the production of security. Hence, for the rest of this chapter I will turn my attention to explaining the superior functioning of a capitalist economy in this particular area—a superiority whose logical case has already been made by now, but which shall be rendered more persuasive once some empirical material is added to the analysis and it is studied as a problem in its own right.[^22]

[^21]: Some libertarian minarchists object that the existence of a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of a common body of law, and hence a government as a monopolistic judge and enforcement agency. (See, for example, John Hospers, *Libertarianism* [Los Angeles: Nash, 1971]; Tibor Machan, *Human Rights and Human Liberties* [Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1975].) Now it is certainly correct that a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of those rules that underlie its operation. But from this it does not follow that this task must be entrusted to a monopolistic agency. In fact, a common language or sign-system is also presupposed by the market; but one would hardly think it convincing to conclude that hence the government must ensure the observance of the rules of language. Like the system of language, then, the rules of market behavior emerge spontaneously and can be enforced by the “invisible hand” of self-interest. Without the observance of common rules of speech, people could not reap the advantages that communication offers, and without the observance of common rules of conduct, people could not enjoy the benefits of the higher productivity of an exchange economy based on the division of labor. In addition, as I indicated above, independent of any government the nonaggression principle underlying the operation of markets can be defended a priori as just. Moreover, as I will argue in the conclusion of this chapter, it is precisely a competitive system of law-administration and law-enforcement that generates the greatest possible pressure to elaborate and enact rules of conduct that incorporate the highest degree of *consensus* conceivable. And of course the very rules that do just this are those that a priori reasoning establishes as the logically necessary presupposition of argumentation and argumentative agreement.

[^22]: Incidentally, the same logic that would force one to accept the idea of the production of security by private business as economically the best solution to the problem of consumer satisfaction also forces one, so far as moral-ideological positions are concerned, to abandon the political theory of classical liberalism and take the small but nevertheless decisive step (from there) to the theory of libertarianism, or private property anarchism. Classical liberalism, with Ludwig von Mises as its foremost representative in the twentieth century, advocates a social system based on the nonaggression principle. And this is also what libertarianism advocates. But classical liberalism then wants to have this principle enforced by a monopolistic agency (the government, the state)—an organization, that is, which is not exclusively dependent on voluntary, contractual support by the consumers of its respective services, but instead has the right to unilaterally determine its own income, i.e., the taxes to be imposed on consumers in order to do its job in the area of security production. Now, however plausible this might sound, it should be clear that it is inconsistent. Either the principle of nonaggression is valid, in which case the state as a privileged monopolist is immoral, or business built on and around aggression—the use of force and of noncontractual means of acquiring resources—is valid, in which case one must toss out the first theory. It is impossible to sustain both contentions and not to be inconsistent unless, of course, one could provide a principle that is more fundamental than both the nonaggression principle and the states’ right to aggressive violence and from which both, with the respective limitations regarding the domains in which they are valid, can be logically derived. However, liberalism never provided any such principle, nor will it ever be able to do so, since, to argue in favor of anything presupposes one’s right to be free of aggression. Given the fact then that the principle of nonaggression cannot be argumentatively contested as morally valid without implicitly acknowledging its validity, by force of logic one is committed to abandoning liberalism and accepting instead its more radical child: libertarianism, the philosophy of pure capitalism, which demands that the production of security be undertaken by private business too.

How would a system of nonmonopolistic, competing producers of security work? It should be clear from the outset that in answering this question one is leaving the realm of purely logical analysis and hence the answers must lack the certainty, the apodictic character of pronouncements on the validity of the public goods theory. The problem faced is precisely analogous to that of asking how a market would solve the problem of hamburger production, especially if up to this point hamburgers had been produced exclusively by the state and hence no one could draw on past experience. Only tentative answers could be formulated. No one could possibly know the exact structure of the hamburger industry—how many competing companies would come into existence, what importance this industry might have compared to others, what the hamburgers would look like, how many different sorts of hamburgers would appear on the market and perhaps disappear again because of a lack of demand, and so on. No one could know all of the circumstances and the changes that would influence the very structure of the hamburger industry—changes in the demands of various consumer groups, changes in technology, changes in the prices of various goods that affect the industry directly or indirectly, and so on. It must be stressed that although similar issues arise concerning the private production of security, this by no means implies that nothing definitive can be said. Assuming certain general conditions of demand for security services (conditions that more or less realistically reflect the world as it presently is) what can and will be said is how different social orders of security production, characterized by different structural constraints under which they have to operate, will respond differently.[^23] Let me first analyze the specifics of monopolistic, state-run security production, for at least in this case one can draw on ample evidence regarding the validity of the conclusions reached and then compare this system with what could be expected if it were replaced by a nonmonopolistic one.

[^23]: On the problem of competitive security production, see Gustave de Molinari, *Production of Security*; Murray N. Rothbard, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 1; idem, *For A New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 12; W.C. Woolridge, *Uncle Sam the Monopoly Man* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1970), chaps. 5–6; Morris and Linda Tannehill, *The Market for Liberty* (New York: Laissez Faire Books, 1984), part 2.

Chiar dacă securitatea este considerată ca fiind un bun public, în alocarea resurselor limitate trebuie să concureze cu alte bunuri. Ceea ce este cheltuit pentru securitate nu mai poate fi folosit pentru alte bunuri care, de asemenea, ar putea spori satisfacția consumatorilor. În plus, securitatea nu este un bun unic, omogen, ci constă mai degrabă în numeroase componente și aspecte. Există nu numai prevenirea criminalității, detectarea infractorilor și aplicarea legii, dar și securitatea de la tâlhari, violatori, poluatori, dezastre naturale și așa mai departe. În plus, securitatea nu este produsă într-o "bucată", ci poate fi furnizată în unități marginale. În plus, diferiți oameni acordă o importanță diferită securității în ansamblu și, de asemenea, diferitelor aspecte ale întregului lucru, în funcție de caracteristicile personale, de experiențele lor trecute cu diverși factori de insecuritate și de timpul și locul în care trăiesc . [^24] Aici abordez problema economică fundamentală de alocare a resurselor limitate pentru utilizările concurente, cum poate statul - o organizație care nu este finanțată exclusiv prin contribuții voluntare și prin vânzarea produselor sale, ci mai degrabă parțial sau chiar integral prin impozite - să decidă cum o mare parte a securității pentru a produce, cât de mult din fiecare dintre nenumăratele sale aspecte, cine și unde să furnizeze cât de mult din ce? Răspunsul este că nu are un mod rațional de a decide această întrebare. Din punctul de vedere al consumatorilor, răspunsul la cerințele lor de securitate trebuie considerat arbitrar. Avem nevoie de un polițist și de un judecător sau de 100.000 din fiecare? Ar trebui să fie plătiți 100 de dolari pe lună sau 10.000 de dolari? În cazul în care polițiștii, oricât de mulți ar putea fi, vor petrece mai mult timp în patrularea străzilor, urmărind hoți și recuperând pradă furată sau spionând participanții la crime fără victime, cum ar fi prostituția, consumul de droguri sau contrabanda? Și ar trebui judecătorii să petreacă mai mult timp și energie în judecarea cazurilor de divorț, a încălcărilor de trafic, a cazurilor de furt și a cazurilor de crimă sau a cazurilor antitrust? În mod clar, toate aceste întrebări trebuie să răspundă într-un fel pentru că atâta timp cât există deficit și nu trăim în Grădina Edenului, timpul și banii cheltuiți pe un singur lucru nu pot fi cheltuiți pe altul. Statul trebuie să răspundă și la aceste întrebări, dar indiferent de ce face, face acest lucru fără a fi supus criteriului de profit și pierdere. Prin urmare, acțiunea sa este arbitrară și implică în mod necesar nenumărate alocări greșite din punctul de vedere al consumatorului. [^25] Independent de un mare număr de consumatori, producătorii de securitate angajați de stat fac în schimb ceea ce le place. Ei se agață în loc să facă ceva, iar dacă muncesc, preferă să facă ceea ce este mai ușor sau să muncească în cazul în care pot folosi puterea, mai degrabă decât să îi servească pe consumatori. Ofițerii de poliție conduc mult, au bătăi de cap cu traficanții mici, cheltuiesc sume uriașe de bani care investighează infracțiunile fără victime, pe care mulți oameni (adică cei neparticipanți) nu le plac, dar puțini ar fi dispuși să-și cheltuiască banii pentru a lupta, neffind direct afectați de acestea. Cu toate acestea, în ceea ce privește cele mai urgente dorințe ale consumatorilor - prevenirea infracțiunilor grave (adică a infracțiunilor cu victimele), reținerea și pedepsirea eficientă a infractorilor, recuperarea prazii și asigurarea compensării victimelor infracțiunilor agresorilor - poliția este notoriu ineficientă, în ciuda alocărilor bugetare tot mai mari. 

[^24]: Vezi Manfred Murck, Soziologie der Öffentlichen Sicherheit (Frankfurt, Campus, 1980).

[^25]:  A spune că procesul de alocare a resurselor devine arbitrar în absența funcționării eficiente a criteriului de pierdere a profitului nu înseamnă că deciziile pe care trebuie să le facă în vreun fel nu sunt supuse nici unui fel de constrângere și, prin urmare, sunt pur capriciu. Ele nu sunt, iar cu astfel de decizii se confruntă cu anumite constrângeri impuse factorului de decizie. Dacă, de exemplu, alocarea factorilor de producție este decisă în mod democratic, atunci evident trebuie să apelați la majoritate. Dar dacă o decizie este constrânsă în acest fel sau dacă este făcută în orice alt mod, ea este încă arbitrară din punctul de vedere al cumpărării sau cumpărării în mod voluntar a consumatorilor.

   În ceea ce privește alocările * controlate în mod democratic *, diferitele deficiențe au devenit destul de evidente. De exemplu, James Buchanan și Richard E. Wagner scrie (* Consecințele dlui Keynes * [London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1978], p. 19):
   
    >  Concurența pe piață este continuă; la fiecare achiziție, un cumpărător este capabil să selecteze dintre vânzătorii concurenți. Concurența politică este intermitentă; o decizie este obligatorie, în general, pentru un număr fix de ani. Competiția pe piață permite mai multor concurenți să supraviețuiască simultan .... Concurența politică conduce la un rezultat total sau deloc .... În competiția pe piață, cumpărătorul poate fi în mod rezonabil sigur cu privire la ceea ce va primi de la achiziția sa. În competiția politică, cumpărătorul achiziționează de fapt serviciile unui agent, pe care nu îl poate lega .... Mai mult, pentru că un politician trebuie să asigure cooperarea unei majorități a politicienilor, sensul unui vot pentru un politician este mai puțin curat decât cel al unui "vot" pentru o firmă privată.

   Vezi și James M. Buchanan, "Alegerea individuală în vot și piață", în idem, * Teoria fiscală și economia politică * (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1962); pentru un tratament mai general al problemei Buchanan și Tullock, * Calculul consimțământului. *
Ceea ce a fost totuși trecut cu vederea - în special cei care încearcă să facă o virtute a faptului că o democrație oferă putere de vot egală tuturor, în timp ce suveranitatea consumatorilor permite "voturi" inegale - este cea mai importantă deficiență a tuturor: sistemul de suveranitate a consumatorilor ar putea face voturi inegale, dar, în orice caz, ele exercită controlul exclusiv asupra lucrurilor pe care le-au dobândit prin acordurile sau contractele originale și, prin urmare, sunt obligate să acționeze moral. Sub o democrație de producție, toată lumea se presupune că are ceva de spus cu privire la lucrurile pe care nu le-a obținut; prin urmare, unul este invitat permanent nu numai pentru a crea instabilitate juridică, cu toate efectele sale negative asupra procesului de formare a capitalului, ci, de asemenea, pentru a acționa imoral. Vezi și Ludwig von Mises, * Socialismul * (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1981), cap. 31.

În plus, orice poliție sau judecătorii angajați de stat se întâmplă să facă (arbitrari, așa cum trebuie să fie), vor avea tendința de a face rău, deoarece veniturile lor sunt mai mult sau mai puțin independente de evaluările consumatorilor asupra serviciilor lor. Astfel, se observă arbitraritatea și brutalitatea poliției și încetinirea procesului judiciar. Mai mult decât atât, este remarcabil faptul că nici poliția, nici sistemul judiciar nu oferă consumatorilor nimic asemănător unui contract de servicii în care este stabilit în mod clar ce procedură se poate aștepta consumatorul să fie pusă în mișcare într-o situație specifică. Mai degrabă ambele acționează într-un vid contractual care le permite în timp să-și schimbe regulile de procedură în mod arbitrar, ceea ce explică adevărul ridicol ca soluționarea litigiilor dintre polițiști și judecători, pe de o parte, și cetățeni privați, pe de altă parte, un terț independent, dar unui alt polițist sau judecător care împărtășește angajatorii cu o parte - guvernul - în litigiu. 
