
Third, anyone who has seen state-run police stations and courts, not to mention prisons, knows how true it is that the factors of production used to provide us with such security are overused, badly maintained, and filthy. Since no one using these factors of production actually owns them (no one can sell them and privately appropriate the receipts from sale) and losses (and gains) in the value embodied in the capital used are thus socialized, everybody will tend to increase his private income resulting from the use of the factors at the expense of losses in capital value. Hence, marginal cost will increasingly tend to exceed the value of marginal product, and an overutilization of capital will result. And if, in an exceptional case, this happens not to be so and an overutilization should not be apparent, then this has only been possible at costs that are comparatively much higher than those of any similar private business.[^26]

[^26]: Sums up Molinari, *Production of Security,* pp. 13–14,
    
    > If … the consumer is not free to buy security wherever he pleases, you forthwith see open up a large profession dedicated to arbitrariness and bad management. Justice becomes slow and costly, the police vexatious, individual liberty is no longer respected, the price of security is abusively inflated and inequitably apportioned, according to the power and influence of this or that class of consumers.

Without a doubt, all of these problems inherent in a system of monopolistic security production would be solved relatively quickly once a given demand for security services was met by a competitive market with its entirely different incentive structure for producers. This is not to say that a “perfect” solution to the problem of security would be found. There would still be robberies and murders; and not all loot would be recovered nor all murderers caught. But in terms of consumer evaluations the situation would improve to the extent that the nature of man would allow it to improve. First, as long as there is a competitive system (i.e., as long as the producers of security services depend on voluntary purchases, most of which probably take the form of service and insurance contracts agreed to in advance of any actual “occurrence” of insecurity or aggression), no producer could increase its income without improving services or quality of product as perceived by the consumers. Furthermore, all security producers taken together could not bolster the importance of their particular industry unless, for whatever reasons, consumers indeed started evaluating security more highly than other goods, thus ensuring that the production of security would never take place at the expense of the non- or reduced production of, let us say, cheese, as a competing private good. In addition, the producers of security services would have to diversify their offerings to a considerable degree because a highly diversified demand for security products among millions and millions of consumers exists. Directly dependent on voluntary consumer support, they would immediately be hurt financially if they did not appropriately respond to the consumers’ various wants or change in wants. Thus every consumer would have a direct influence, albeit small, on the output of goods appearing on or disappearing from the security market. Instead of offering a uniform “security packet” to everyone, a characteristic of state production policy, a multitude of service packages would appear on the market. They would be tailored to the different security needs of different people, taking account of different occupations, different risk-taking behavior, different needs for protection and insurance, and different geographical locations and time constraints.

But that is far from all. Besides diversification, the content and quality of the products would improve, too. Not only would the treatment of consumers by the employees of security enterprises improve immediately, the “I-could-care-less” attitude, the arbitrariness and even brutality, the negligence and tardiness of the present police and judicial systems would ultimately disappear. Since policemen and judges would be dependent on voluntary consumer support, any instances of maltreatment of consumers, of impoliteness or ineptness could cost them their job. Further, the peculiarity that the settlement of disputes between a client and his business partner is invariably entrusted to the latter’s judgment, would almost certainly disappear from the books, and conflict arbitration by independent parties would become the standard offered by producers of security. Most importantly, in order to attract and retain customers the producers of such services would have to offer contracts that would allow the consumer to know what he was buying and enable him to raise a valid, intersubjectively ascertainable complaint if the actual performance of the security producer did not live up to the contract. More specifically, insofar as they are not individualized service contracts where payment is made by a customer to cover his own risks exclusively but are rather insurance contracts that require pooling one’s own risks with those of other people, contrary to the present statist practice these contracts most certainly would no longer contain any deliberately built-in redistributive scheme favoring one group of people at the expense of another. Otherwise, if anyone had the feeling that the contract offered to him required him to pay for other people’s peculiar needs and risks—factors of possible insecurity, that is, that he did not perceive as applicable to his own case—he would simply reject signing it or discontinue his payments.

Yet when all this is said, the question will inevitably surface. “Wouldn’t a competitive system of security production necessarily result in permanent social conflict, in chaos and anarchy?” Several responses can be made to this question. First, it should be noted that such an impression would by no means be in accordance with historical, empirical evidence. Systems of competing courts have existed at various places (e.g., in ancient Ireland or at the time of the Hanseatic League) before the arrival of the modern nation state, and as far as we know they worked well.[^27] Judged by the then existent crime rate (crime per capita), the private police in the so-called Wild West (which incidentally was not as wild as some movies imply) were relatively more successful than today’s state-supported police).[^28] And turning to contemporary experience and examples, millions and millions of international contracts exist even now—contracts of trade and travel—and it certainly seems to be an exaggeration to say, for instance, that there is more fraud, more crime, more breach of contract there than in domestic relations. And this, it should be noted, without there being one big monopolistic security producer and lawmaker. Finally it is not to be forgotten that even now in a great number of countries there are various private security producers alongside the state: private investigators, insurance detectives, and private arbitrators. Their work seems to confirm the thesis that they are more, not less, successful in resolving social conflicts than their public counterparts.

[^27]: Vezi literatura citată la nota 22; de asemenea, Bruno Leoni, Libertatea și Legea (Princeton, N.J .: D. Van Nostrand, 1961); Joseph Peden, "Drepturile de proprietate în dreptul celtic irlandez", Journal of Libertarian Studies 1, nr. 2 (1977). 

[^28]: Vezi Terry L. Anderson și Peter J. Hill, "Experimentul american în anarho-capitalism: The Not Wild", West Wild, "Journal of Libertarian Studies 3, nr. 1 (1980). 

Cu toate acestea, aceste dovezi istorice sunt foarte mult supuse disputei, în special în ceea ce privește posibilitatea obținerii unor informații generale. Cu toate acestea, există și motive sistematice, de ce temerea exprimată de întrebare nu este bine întemeiată. Paradoxal, așa cum pare, instituirea unui sistem competitiv de producători de securitate presupune crearea unei structuri de stimulare instituționalizate care să creeze un ordin de drept și de aplicare a legii care să cuprindă cel mai înalt grad posibil de consens cu privire la problema soluționării conflictelor. O astfel de structură va genera mai degrabă mai puțin decât mai multe tulburări sociale și conflicte decât ar avea loc sub auspiciile monopoliste. [^29] Pentru a înțelege acest paradox, este necesar să examinăm mai atent singura situație tipică care se referă la sceptic și care îi permite să creadă în virtutea superioară a unei ordini monopoliste a producției de securitate: atunci când apare un conflict între A și B, ambii sunt asigurați de diferite companii, iar companiile nu pot ajunge la un acord imediat cu privire la valabilitatea afirmațiilor contradictorii prezentate de clienții lor. (Nici o problemă nu ar exista dacă s-ar ajunge la un astfel de acord sau dacă ambii clienți ar fi fost asigurați de una și aceeași societate - cel puțin problema nu ar fi diferită în niciun fel de cea care apare sub un monopol statist.) Nu ar fi o astfel de situație să ducă întotdeauna la o împrăștiere? Acest lucru este foarte puțin probabil. În primul rând, orice bătălie violentă dintre companii ar fi costisitoare și riscantă, în special dacă aceste societăți ar fi ajuns la un nivel de respectabilitate (ceea ce ar fi important ca acestea să aibă pentru a deveni, în primul rând, garanții de securitate eficienți pentru potențialii clienți) . Mai important, în cadrul unui sistem competitiv cu fiecare companie dependent de continuarea plăților voluntare pentru consumatori, orice bătălie ar trebui să fie susținută în mod deliberat de fiecare client al ambelor companii. Dacă ar exista doar o singură persoană care și-a retras plățile pentru că nu era convins că este necesară o bătălie în conflictul special, ar fi existat o presiune economică imediată asupra companiei pentru a căuta o soluție pașnică a conflictului.[^30] Orice producător competitiv de securitate ar fi extrem de precaut în ceea ce privește angajarea în măsuri violente pentru rezolvarea conflictelor. Mai degrabă, în măsura în care este vorba de rezolvarea pașnică a conflictelor pe care consumatorii o doresc, fiecare producător de securitate ar trebui să facă mari eforturi pentru a le furniza clienților săi și pentru a stabili în prealabil, pentru toată lumea să știe, ce proces de arbitraj ar fi dispus să se supună și clienților săi în cazul unui dezacord asupra evaluării creanțelor conflictuale. Deoarece un astfel de sistem ar putea apărea clienților diferitelor firme care să funcționeze doar dacă există un acord între aceștia cu privire la astfel de măsuri arbitrare, un sistem de drept care să guverneze relațiile dintre companii, care ar fi universal acceptabil pentru clienții tuturor securității concurente producătorii ar evolua în mod natural. În plus, presiunea economică de a genera reguli care să reprezinte un consens cu privire la modul în care ar trebui să se facă față conflictelor este și mai îndepărtată. În cadrul unui sistem concurențial, arbitrii independenți cărora li s-ar fi încredințat sarcina de a găsi soluții pașnice pentru conflicte ar depinde de sprijinul continuu al celor două companii în litigiu, în măsura în care societățile ar putea și ar selecta diferiți judecători dacă oricare dintre ei ar fi suficient nemulțumit de rezultatul lucrărilor de arbitraj. Astfel, acești judecători ar fi supuși unor presiuni pentru a găsi soluții la problemele care le-au fost transmise, care, de data aceasta nu cu privire la aspectele procedurale ale dreptului, ci la conținutul său, ar fi acceptabile pentru toți clienții firmelor implicate.[^31] În caz contrar, una sau toate societățile ar putea să își piardă clienții, determinând astfel firmele să se îndrepte către arbitri diferiți la următoarea dată când au nevoie de unul. [^32] 

[^29]:  În cele ce urmează, a se vedea Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Eigentum, Anarchie și Staat (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1986), cap. 5. 

[^30]:  În contrast cu politica statului de a se angaja în bătălii fără a avea sprijinul deliberat al tuturor, deoarece are dreptul de a impozita oamenii; și întrebați-vă dacă riscul de război ar fi mai mic sau mai mare dacă cineva ar avea dreptul să înceteze să plătească impozite de îndată ce cineva ar avea sentimentul de manipularea de către stat sau ministerul afacerilor externe nu este de preferat. 

[^31]:  Și poate fi remarcat aici din nou că normele care încorporează cele mai înalte grade posibile de consens sunt, desigur, cele care sunt presupuse de argumentare și a căror acceptare face consens asupra oricărui lucru posibil, după cum sa arătat mai sus. 

[^32]:Din nou, contrazic acest lucru cu judecătorii angajați de stat care, datorită faptului că sunt plătiți din impozite și care sunt relativ independenți de satisfacția consumatorilor, pot să pronunțe hotărâri care în mod evident nu sunt acceptabile ca fiind echitabile de toți; și întrebați-vă dacă riscul de a nu găsi adevărul într-un caz dat ar fi mai mic sau mai ridicat dacă cineva ar avea posibilitatea de a exercita o presiune economică ori de câte ori cineva avea sentimentul că un judecător care într-o zi ar fi trebuit să se pronunțe în propria cauză nu a fost suficient de atent în asamblarea și judecarea faptelor unui caz sau pur și simplu a fost un adevărat escroc. 

Dar nu ar fi posibil ca, în cadrul unui sistem competitiv, ca o firmă producătoare de securitate să devină o companie ilegală - o firmă, adică care, susținută de propriii clienți, a început să agraveze împotriva altora? Cu siguranță nu există nici o modalitate de a ne nega că acest lucru ar fi posibil, deși din nou trebuie subliniat faptul că aici se află în domeniul științei sociale empirice și nimeni nu poate cunoaște un astfel de lucru cu certitudine. Și totuși, implicarea tacită a faptului că posibilitatea ca o firmă de securitate să devină o companie ilegală indică într-un fel o deficiență severă în filosofia și economia unei ordini sociale pure capitaliste este falabilă.[^33]

[^33]: See on the following in particular Rothbard, *For A New Liberty*, pp. 233ff.

First, it should be recalled that any social system, a statist-socialist order no less than a pure market economy, is dependent for its continued existence on public opinion and that a given state of public opinion at all times delimits what can or cannot occur as well as what is more or less likely to occur. The current state of public opinion in West Germany, for instance, makes it highly unlikely or even impossible that a statist-socialist system of the current Soviet type could be imposed on the West German public. The lack of public support for such a system would doom it to failure and make it collapse. It is even more unlikely that any attempt to impose a Soviet-type order could ever hope to succeed among Americans, given American public opinion. Hence, in order for us to see the problem of outlaw companies correctly, the above question should be phrased as follows: How likely is it that any such event would occur in a given society with its specific state of public opinion? Formulated in this way, it is clear that the answer would have to be different for different societies. For some, characterized by socialist ideas deeply entrenched in the public, there would be a greater likelihood of the reemergence of aggressor companies, and for other societies there would be a much smaller chance of this happening. But then, would the prospect of a competitive system of security production in any given case be better or worse than that of the continuation of a statist system? Let us look, for instance, at the present-day United States. Assume that by a legislative act the state had abolished its right to provide security with tax funds and a competitive system of security production was introduced. Given the state of public opinion, how likely then would it be that outlaw producers would spring up, and what if they did? Evidently, the answer would depend on the reactions of the public to this changed situation. Thus, the first reply to those challenging the idea of a private market for security would have to be: What about you? What would your reaction be? Does your fear of outlaw companies mean that you would then go out and engage in trade with a security producer that aggressed against other people and their property, and would you continue supporting it if it did? Certainly the critic would be much muted by this counterattack. But more important than this is the systematic challenge implied in this personal counterattack. Evidently, the described change in the situation would imply a change in the cost-benefit structure that everyone would face once he had to make his decisions. Before the introduction of a competitive system of security production, it had been legal to participate in and support (state) aggression. Now such an activity would be illegal. Hence, given one’s conscience, which makes each decision appear more or less costly (i.e., more or less in harmony with one’s own principles of correct behavior), support for a firm engaging in the exploitation of people unwilling to deliberately support its actions would be more costly than before. Given this fact, it must be assumed that the number of people (including even those who otherwise would have readily lent their support to the state) who would now spend their money to support a firm committed to honest business would rise wherever this social experiment was tried. In contrast, the number of people still committed to a policy of exploitation—of gaining at the expense of others—would fall. How drastic this effect would be would of course depend on the state of public opinion. In the example at hand—the United States, where the natural theory of property is extremely widespread and accepted as a private ethic, the libertarian philosophy being essentially the ideology on which the country was founded and that led it to the height it reached[^34]—the effect would naturally be particularly pronounced. Accordingly, security producing firms committed to the philosophy of protecting and enforcing libertarian law would attract the greatest bulk of public support and financial assistance. And while it may be true that some people, and among them especially those who have profited from the old order, might continue their support of a policy of aggression, it is very unlikely that they would be sufficient in number and financial strength to succeed in doing so. Rather, the likely outcome would be that the honest companies would develop the strength needed—alone or in a combined effort and supported in this effort by their own voluntary customers—to check any such emergence of outlaw producers and destroy them wherever and whenever they came into existence.[^35]

[^34]: See Bernard Bailyn, *The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); Jackson Turner Main, *The Anti-Federalists: Critics of the Constitution* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1961); Murray N. Rothbard, *Conceived in Liberty* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1975–1979).

[^35]: Naturally, insurance companies would assume a particularly important role in checking the emergence of outlaw companies. Note Morris and Linda Tannehill (*The Market of Liberty*, pp. 110–11):

    > Insurance companies, a very important sector of any totally free economy, would have a special incentive to dissociate themselves from any aggressor and, in addition, to bring all their considerable business influence to bear against him. *Aggressive violence causes value loss*, and the insurance industry would suffer the major cost in most such value losses. An unrestrained aggressor is a walking liability, and no insurance company, however remotely removed from his original aggression, would wish to sustain the risk that he might aggress against one of its own clients next. Besides, aggressors and those who associate with them are more likely to be involved in situations of violence and are, thus, bad insurance risks. An insurance company would probably refuse coverage to such people out of a foresighted desire to minimize any future losses which their aggression might cause. But even if the company were not motivated by such foresight, it would still be forced to rate their premiums up drastically or cancel their coverage altogether in order to avoid carrying the extra risk invoked in their inclination to violence. In a competitive economy, no insurance company could afford to continue covering aggressors and those who had dealings with aggressors and simply pass the cost on to its honest customers; it would soon lose these customers to more reputable firms which could afford to charge less for their insurance coverage.
