# Wnioski

W stosunkowo krótkim czasie, omówiliśmy ogromny zakres materiału. Największym wyzwaniem filozofii jest definicja uniwersalnej, obiektywnej i bezwzględnej moralności, która nie opiera się na Bogu bądź państwie. W momencie w który opieramy się na Bogu lub państwie przy definicji moralności, moralność nie jest już uniwersalna, obiektywna ani bezwzględna. Innymi słowami, nie jest już "moralnością."

The invention of imaginary entities such as “God” and “the state” does *nothing* to answer our questions about morality.

W pełni rozumiemy, iż wynalazek Boga nie zrobił nic - i nie robi nic - aby odpowiedzieć na nasze pytania o pochodzeniu życia lub wszechświata. To say, in answer to any question, “some incomprehensible being did some inconceivable thing in some unfathomable manner for unknowable purposes,” cannot be considered any sort of rational answer.

The gravest danger in making up incomprehensible “answers” to rational and essential questions is that it provides the *illusion* of an answer, which in general negates the pursuit of truth. Furthermore, a group inevitably coalesces to defend and profit from this irrational non-answer. In the realm of religion, this is the priestly caste. In the realm of government, this is the political caste.

When a real and essential question is met with a mystical and violent “answer,” human progress turns to regression. The science of meteorology fails to come into being if the priests say that the rain comes because the gods will it. The science of medicine fails to develop if illness is considered a moral punishment from the gods. The science of physics stalls and regresses if the motion of the stars is considered the clockwork of the deities.

When false answers are presented to moral questions, questioning those answers inevitably becomes a moral crime. When illusions are substituted for curiosity, those who profit from those illusions inevitably end up using violence to defend their lies.

And for evermore, *children* are the first victims of these exploitive falsehoods.

Children do not have to be bullied into eating candy, playing tag, or understanding that two plus two is four. The human mind does not require that the truth be inflicted through terror, boredom, insults and repetition. A child does not have to be “taught” that a toy is real by telling him that he is damned to hell for eternity if he does not *believe* that the toy is real. A child does not have to be bullied into believing that chocolate tastes good by being told that his taste buds are damned by original sin.

Saying that morality exists because God tells us that it exists is exactly the same as saying that morality does not exist. If you buy an iPod from me on eBay, and I send you an empty box, you will write to me in outrage. If I tell you not to worry, that my invisible friend assures me that there is in fact an iPod in the box, would you be satisfied? Would not my claim that my invisible friend tells me of the iPod’s existence be a certain proof that the iPod did not in fact exist?

If morality is justified according to the authority of a being that does not exist, then morality by definition is not justified. Jeśli wypiszę czek który jest "certyfikowany" przez bank, który nie istnieje, wtedy według definicji mój czek jest *nieprawidłowy*.

The same is true for enforcing morality through the irrational monopoly of “the state.” If we allow the existence of a government – a minority of people who claim the right to initiate the use of force, a right which is specifically denied to everyone else – then any and all moral “rules” enforced by the government are purely subjective, since the government is *by definition* based on a violation of moral rules.

If I say that I need the government to protect my property, but that the government is by definition a group of people who can violate my property rights at will, then I am caught in an insurmountable contradiction. I am saying that my property rights must be defended – and then I create an agency to defend them that can violate them at any time. This is like being so afraid of rape that I hire a bodyguard to protect me from being raped – but in the contract, I allow my bodyguard – and anyone he chooses – to rape me at will.

Ponieważ "moralność" oparta na państwie i religii jest tak bardzo irracjonalna i paradoksalna, *wymaga* ona agencji społecznej z monopolem na inicjacje siły, aby funkcjonować. Since everyone is just making up “morals” and claiming absolute justification based on imaginary entities, rational negotiation and understanding remain impossible. We do not need a government because people are bad, but rather, because people are irrational, we end up with a government. False moral theories always end up requiring violence to enforce them. Moral theories are not developed in *response* to violence – false moral theories *cause* violence – in fact, *demand* violence.

The moral subjectivism and irrationality involved in answering “What is truth?” with “God,” and “What is morality?” with “government,” is so openly revealed by the framework of UPB that it is hard to imagine that this concept is not more widespread.

One central reason for this is that truly understanding UPB requires the very highest possible mental functioning. It is relatively easy to be rational; it is very difficult to think about the implicit premises of rationality, and all that they entail. It is relatively easy to debate; it is very difficult to tease out all of the implicit assumptions involved in the very act of debating.

Łatwym jest złapanie piłki - trudnym jest wynalezienie prawa fizyki które *uniwersalnie* tłumaczy ruch.

Myślenie *o* myśleniu jest najtrudniejszą mentalną dyscypliną ze wszystkich.

Na początku tej książki, mówiłem o "bestii" która przeraziła i zniewoliła ludzkość. Ta bestia zawsze znajduje się na szczycie góry, lub w głębokiej jaskini. Ludzie boją się bestii w świecie, dlatego bestia nigdy nie została pokonana.

Bestia nigdy nie została pokonana, ponieważ bestia jest iluzją.

Bestia nie może zostać pokonana w świecie, ponieważ bestia jest w nas samych.

The collective fantasy that there exists a “null zone,” where morality magically reverses itself, called “the government” is exactly the same as the collective fantasy that there exists a “null zone” called “God” where *reality* reverses itself.

If we define “morality” according to the subjective fantasies of mere mortals, then it will forever remain under the manipulative control of power-hungry tyrants. Since God does not exist, anyone who speaks about morality in relation to God is just making up definitions to serve his own purposes.

Ponieważ "państwo" nie istnieje, każdy kto mówi o moralności w stosunku do rządu, wymyśla definicje, które mają służyć jego celom.

Until we can define an objective and rational morality that is free from the subjective whims of each individual, we will never make the kind of progress that we need to as a species.

Jeżeli mamy się rozwijać - i rzeczywiście, być może, aby w ogóle przetrwać, moralność jak fizyka, biologia, geologia i chemia, musi dołączyć do obszaru nauk.

However, if we can sustain our courage, it is this discipline alone that can set us, and our children – and all humanity in the future – free from the tyranny of the greatest beast: our own moral illusions.