## #

Walang duda na ang pagbabayad ng buwis ay maaaring makaapekto sa pagbagal ng produksyon at kasabay nito ay ang pamantayan ng pamumuhay ng mga mamimili. Ano pa man ang gawin, ang tunay na konklusyon sa pagbabayad ng buwis ay humahadlang sa mga mamamayan upang mabago ang kanilang estado sa buhay at lumilikha ng kahirapan.

Ito ang nagbigay-daan para sa aking ikalawang paksa: ang sosyolohiyo ng buwis. Kung ang pagbabayad ng buwis ay isang instrumento para makasira sa pagbuo ng yaman na siyang nakakaapekto sa estado ng pamumuhay ng mga mamamayan, samakatuwid, paano maipapaliwanag kung bakit may buwis at bakit kailangan magbayad nito; sa ilang daang taon na patuloy itong umiiral, kasabay nito, patuloy din tayong nakakaranas ng di maiiwasang pagtaas na nararamdaman sa bawat kilos at pangangailangan ng mga mamamayan; at ang mga institusyon na nagunguna sa pagproseso nito, ang "tax-states" ng "Western World, mga makapangyarihan at nasa mataas na posisyon sa mundo ng pulitika na malaki ang impluwensya at kayang pasunurin ang buong mundo.

Sa lahat ng mga katanungan na ito, may isang naiiwan para sa kapangyarihan ng teorya ng ekonomiya. Sinasagot ng ekonomiya ang tanong na "Ano ang maaaring dulot ng pagpapatupad ng buwis?" ang lohikal na konklusyon upang maunawaan ang ibigsabihin ng pagsasagawa at pagpapataw ng buwis bilang partikular na pagsasabuhay nito. Bakit ang pagpapataw ng buwis ay isang paksa na dapat pag-usapan sa ilalim ng sikolohiya, kasaysayan o sosyolohiya. Ang ekonomiya, o ang pag-aaral ng kilos at pag-uugali ng tao na tinatawag ding "praxeology", at kumikilala na ang ideya, tama o mali, mabuti man o masama ay mga tumutukoy kung paano ang tao ay kumikilos. Ngunit hindi nito ipinapaliwanag kung ano ang mga ideyang ito at kung paano nito hinahawakan at binabago ang isang tao. Sa halip, ito ay ipinapalagay na nasa kanila na at ang pakay na ipaliwanag ang mga lohikal na kalalabasan ng kanilang mga kilos, kahit ano pa man ito. Ang kasaysayan at sosyolohiya ay tinatanong kung ano ang mga ideyang ito, kung paaano ang tao ay tinatanggap ang mga ito, at kung bakit sila kumikilos sa paraan na ginagawa nila.[^16]

Sa mataas na lebel ng abstrak, ang sagot sa tanong na kung bakit patuloy ang pagtaas ng pagbabayad ng buwis ay: ang ugat ng dahilan nito ay mabagal ngunit napakamalaking pagbabago sa ideya ng katarungan na ayon sa pananaw ng publiko.

Aking ipapaliwanag. Ang isa ay maaaring makakuha ng pag-aari sa pamamagitan ng pag-upa, produksyon, at pangongontrata o kung hindi naman, sa pamamagitan ng pangangamkam at pananamantala sa mga may-ari ng paupahan, mga prodyuser, o mga nangongontrata. Wala nang iba pang mga paraan.[^17] Ang parehong pamamaraan ay natural na nakikita sa sangkatauhan. Kasama ang produksyon at pangongontrata, kaakibat nito, laging mayroong proseso para sa mga hindi produktibo at walang pangongontrata na makukuha sa mga nagmamay-ari. Tulad sa isang produktibong organisasyon sa negosyo, ito ay maaaring mapaunlad bilang isang kumpanya na isa lang ang nagmamay-ari at isang malaking korporasyon, kaya ang mga kumpanya na nangangamkam at nananamantala na malaki ang bilang ay kadalasan na matatagpuan sa gobyerno at estado[^18] Ang pagbabayad ng buwis na patuloy na umiiral ay hindi na nakakapagtaka kung ito man ay tuluyan ding tumaas. Para sa ideya ng hindi produktibo o walang kontrata ay halos parehas tulad ng isang lumang ideya sa produktibo, at ang lahat-ang nananamantala na mga prodyuser-ay mas pinipili ang mataas na sahod kumpara sa mababa.

Ang mabigat na tanong ay: ano ang mga kumokontrol at pumipigil sa bilang at paglaki ng isang negosyo?

Dapat ito ay maliwanag na ang pagpigil sa bilang ng mga solong negosyo ng mga nangangamkam na prodyuser at mga nangongontrata ay nasa ilalim ng iba't-ibang natural na kategorya kaysa sa mga pumipigil sa dami nito na naka-ugnay sa palitan ng produktibo. Ito ay kabaligtaran sa sinasabi ng mga pampublikong paaralan, gobyerno, at pribadong mga solong negosyo na hindi alisunod sa dapat na ginagawa bilang isang negosyo. Ito ay naka-ugnay sa iba't-ibang uri ng kategorya sa mga operasyon.[^19]

Ang sukat ng mga produktibong organisasyon ng negosyo ay napipigilan sa kabilang banda ng pangangailangan ng mamimili (na nagpapakita ng tunay na pagpigil na makukuha bilang kabuuang kita), bilang hamon ng iba pang mga prodyuser, na tuluyang nangagahas sa bawat negosyo o "firm" na magbukas gamit ang posibleng pinakamababang halaga kung nais nitong tumagal sa isang negosyo. Para sa isang negosyo na lumalaki ang bilang, ang lahat ng mamimili ay dapat mapagsilbihan sa pinaka-epektibo at sapat na mga pamamaraan. Wala nang iba kundi ang bolutaryong mamimili ang kukuha na sumusuporta sa sukat nito.

Ang pumipigil sa iba pang uri ng negosyo, gobyerno o estado, ang lahat ay magkakaiba. Para sa isang bagay, nakakabaliw na sabihin na ang sukat ay natutukoy sa pamamagitan ng pangangailangan na parehas sa sukat ng isang pribadong negosyo na natutukoy din ayon sa pangangailangan. Hindi maaaring sabihin na, at kahit anong isip ang gawin, ang mga nagmamay-ari, ang mga prodyuser, at mga nangongonrata ay dapat na isuko ang bahagi ng kanilang yaman sa gobyerno gayong kailangan din naman ang kanilang serbisyo. Sa halip, wala silang magagawa kundi tanggapin ito, at ito ang tunay na pruweba na nagpapakita sa katotohanan na ang sebisyo ay hindi talaga kailangan. Kaya naman, ang pangangailangan ay hindi maisasaalang-alang bilang paglimita sa sukat ng gobyerno. Sa paglago nito, ang estado ay lumalaki bilang gumaganap na bukas na *kabaligtaran* sa pangangailangan.

Ang estado ay hindi napipigilan sa parehong paraan na paligsahan tulad sa produktibong negosyo. Di tulad sa isang negosyo, ang estado ay dapat na manatili na mas mataas ang kanilang halaga para sa kanilang operasyon at di na dapat bumaba pa, dahil kung hindi, maaari nilang patawan ng buwis ang kanilang mga kakompitensya, at mamanipula ang mga ito. Kaya naman, ang sukat ang estado ay hindi maisasaalang-alang bilang pagpigil sa kanila sa pamamagitan ng kompetisyon sa halaga. Habang lumalago ito, ito'y patuloy na nangyayari sa kabila ng katotohanan na *hindi* ito "cost-efficient".

Ganoon pa man, 'di maaaring sabihin na ang sukat ng gobyerno ay hindi kayang pigilan at ang pagbaba ng sukat sa kasaysayan ng estado ay hindi malayong mangyari. Ipinapahayag lamang nito na ang pagpigil sa "gobyerno" ay napakalaki ng pagkakaiba.

Sa halip na mapigilan gamit ang halaga at ang mga kondisyon ng pangangailangan, ang paglago na pananamantala sa negosyo ay napipigilan sa pamamagitan ng opinyon ng publiko:[^20]ito ay hindi boluntaryong pagsuporta kundi ito ay natural na sapilitan na nagaganap. Sa kabilang banda ng parehong kalagayan, ang sapilitang pagganap ay bumubuo sa mga biktima, at ang mga biktima ay 'di mga sumusuporta kundi aktibo o sadyang sumusunod sa kahit anong nangyayari na kumukontra sa sukat ng negosyo. Ito ay kaisip-isip na ang konteksto ng pagtutol ay maaaring matagalan sa pamamagitan ng pagsira sa kaso ng isang tao o ng grupo, ang pananamantala sa isa, maaaring dalawa o tatlo pa, o iba pang grupo na halos parehas ang dami. Ito ay di abot maisip, na kahit ganoon pa man, ang isipin na ang nag-iisang lakas na maaaring sumira sa pagtutol ay ang mga nasa maliliit na minorya na syang nagpapatakbo sa mga negosyo na nangangamkam at nananamantala sa maraming bilang ng tao, sampu, daan, o libo pang higit na mas malaki kaysa sa kanilang sukat.[^21] Para ito ay mangyari, ang negosyo ay dapat na may suporta galing sa publiko para sa karagdagan ng pwersahang lakas nito. Ang karamihan sa populasyon ay dapat tanggapin ang mga operasyon nito bilang lihitimo. Ang pagtanggap na ito ay maaaring saklaw galing sa aktibong interes papuntang walang pasubali na pagbibitiw. Subalit marapat na tanggapin sa isip ng isang mayorya na dapat isuko ang inakalang aktibo o positibo na labanan ang anumang tangka sa pagpapatupad ng walang ipinagbunga at hindi naaayon sa kontrata ari-arian na mga kinuha. Imbes na ipakita ang kalupitan sa ganong mga labanan, na nagpapakita ng paglalapastangan sa lahat na kung sinuman nakikipagkasundo sa kanila, at kumilos ng walang tumutulong na makagawa ng katagumpayan (hindi nasambit na aktibong sinubukan para pumigil sa kanila), isang mayorya ang marapat na aktibo o positibong pagsuporta sa kanilang lahat. Iisang ilaw ito na maaaring ipaunawa kung papaano ang iilan ay maaring pamunuan ang karamihan. Kalagayang-sumusuporta sa pampublikong mga upinyon na maaring bumabalanse sa pagtutol nang nabiktimang mga ari-arian na may kanya-kanyang nagmamay-ari na saklaw sa pagtutol na ang kinahinatnan ay walang katuturan.

The state of public opinion also imposes a constraint on the size of the state in another respect. Every firm in the large-scale business of property expropriation must naturally aim to be a monopolist in a definite territory, for one can only prosper in such a business so long as there is something that can be expropriated. However, if competition were allowed in the business of expropriating, there would obviously be nothing left to take. Hence, in order to stay in business, one must be a monopolist.

Even if there is no internal competition, competition between governments operating in *different* territories still exists, and it is this competition that imposes severe limits on the size of government. On the one hand, it opens up the possibility that people may vote with their feet against a government and leave its territory if they perceive other territories as offering less exploitative living conditions. Naturally, each state must see this as a crucial problem, for it literally lives off a population, and any population loss is thus a loss of potential state-income.[^22] Again, the state of public opinion is of utmost importance for maintaining exploitative rule. Only if the state succeeds in generating the impression in the general public that that state’s own territory compares favorably, or at least tolerably well with others will it be able to secure and expand its position.

Public opinion also plays a decisive role in the case of interstate aggression. While not a logical necessity, the nature of a state as an exploitative enterprise still makes it highly likely (not the least because of the just addressed problem of population movements) that it will become engaged in aggression against a “foreign” territory, or that it must defend itself against such aggression from other states.[^23] Moreover, in order to emerge successfully from such interstate wars or warlike actions, a state must be in command of sufficient (in relative terms) economic resources that alone make its actions sustainable. However, these resources can only be provided by a productive population. Thus, to secure the means necessary to win wars and avoid being confronted with slackening productive outputs while at war, public opinion again turns out to be the decisive variable controlling the size of government. Only if popular support for the state’s war exists can it be sustained and possibly won.

Finally, the state of public opinion limits the size of government in yet a third way. While the state maintains its position vis-à-vis the exploited population through coercion and the successful management of public opinion, to maintain its own internal order, which regulates the relationships between the various branches of government and its employees, there is nothing else at its disposal but public opinion, for clearly, no one outside the state exists who could enforce its internal rules upon it. Rather, the enforcement must be accomplished exclusively by means of supportive public opinion among state employees themselves in the various branches of government.[^24] That is, the president cannot coerce the general to go to war—in fact, the greater physical strength would probably be on the general’s side; and the general in turn cannot coerce his soldiers to do the fighting and killing—in fact, they could smash him anytime. President and general can only succeed because of favorable intrastate public opinion, and only insofar as the overwhelming majority of the state employees at least passively supports their actions as legitimate. If, in the various branches of government, a large majority of them were strictly opposed to the enforcement of presidential policy, it could not be put into action successfully. The general who thinks most of his troops consider the war illegitimate or who thinks that the Congress, the IRS, the large majority of public educators and the so-called social services regard such actions as outrageous and to be openly opposed, would face an impossible task even if he himself supported the presidential command.[^25]

With public opinion rather than demand and cost conditions thus identified as the constraining force on the size of government, I return to my original explanation of the phenomenon of ever-increasing taxation as “simply” a change in prevailing ideas.

If it is public opinion that ultimately limits the size of an exploitative firm, then an explanation of its growth in purely ideological terms is justified. Indeed, any other explanation, not in terms of ideological changes but of changes in “objective” conditions must be considered wrong. The size of government does not increase because of any objective causes over which ideas have no control and certainly not because there is a demand for it. It grows because the ideas that prevail in public opinion of what is just and what is wrong have changed. What once was regarded by public opinion as an outrage, to be treated and dealt with as such, has become increasingly accepted as legitimate.

What has happened regarding the general public’s conception of justice?[^26]

[^16]: To make this distinction between economics and history or sociology is not to say, of course, that economics is of no importance for these latter disciplines. In fact, economics is indispensable for all other social sciences. While the reverse is not the case, economics can be developed and advanced without historical or sociological knowledge. The only consequence of doing so is that such economics would probably not be very interesting, as it would be written without consideration of real examples or instances of application (as if one were to write on the economics of taxation even though there had never been an actual example of it in all of history), for it would formulate what could not possibly happen in the social world, or what would have to happen provided that certain conditions were in fact fulfilled. Thus, any historical or sociological explanation is logically constrained by the laws as espoused by economic theory, and any account by a historian or sociologist in violation of these laws must be treated as ultimately confused. On the relationship between economic theory and history see also Ludwig von Mises, *Theory and History* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^17]: See on this also Franz Oppenheimer, *The State* (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914) esp. pp. 24–27; Rothbard, *Power and Market*, chap. 2; Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chap. 2.

[^18]: On the theory of the state as developed in the following see—in addition to the works cited in note 17—in particular Herbert Spencer, *Social Statics* (New York: Schalkenbach Foundation, 1970); Auberon Herbert, *The Right and Wrong of Compulsion by the State* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1978); Albert J. Nock, *Our Enemy, the State* (Tampa, Fla.: Hallberg Publishing, 1983); Murray N. Rothbard, *For a New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); Anthony de Jasay, *The State* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).

[^19]: This central idea of the public choice school has been expressed by its foremost representatives as follows:

> Both the economic relation and the political relation represent cooperation on the part of two or more individuals. The market and the state are both devices through which co-operation is organized and made possible. Men co-operate through exchange of goods and services in organized markets, and such co-operation implies mutual gain. The individual enters into an exchange relationship in which he furthers his own interest by providing some product or service that is of direct benefit to the individual on the other side of the transaction. At base, political or collective action under the individualistic view of the State is much the same. Two or more individuals find it mutually advantageous to join forces to accomplish certain common purposes. In a very real sense, they “exchange” and devote resources to the construction of the common good. (James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* [Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press], p. 192)

Surely, the most amazing thing about such a “new theory of politics” is that anyone takes it seriously. Remarks Joseph A. Schumpeter on such views:

> The theory which construes taxes on the analogy of club dues or the purchase of the service of, say, a doctor only proves how far removed this part of the social sciences is from scientific habits of mind. (*Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy* [New York: Harper, 1942], p. 198)

And H.L. Mencken has this to say regarding a thesis such as Buchanan’s and Tullock’s:

> The average man, whatever his errors otherwise, at least sees clearly that government is something lying outside him and outside the generality of his fellow men—that it is a separate, independent and often hostile power, only partly under his control, and capable of doing him great harm…. Is it a fact of no significance that robbing the government is everywhere regarded as a crime of less magnitude than robbing an individual, or even a corporation? … When a private citizen is robbed a worthy man is deprived of the fruits of his industry and thrift; when the government is robbed the worst that happens is that certain rogues and loafers have less money to play with than they had before. The notion that they have earned that money is never entertained; to most sensible men it would seem ludicrous. They are simply rascals who, by accidents of law, have a somewhat dubious right to a share in the earnings of their fellow men. When that share is diminished by private enterprise the business is, on the whole, far more laudable than not. (*A Mencken Chrestomathy* [New York: Vintage Books, 1949] pp. 146–47)

[^20]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Anatomy of the State” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974), esp. pp. 37–42.

[^21]: It might be thought that the government could accomplish such a feat by merely improving its weaponry: by threatening with atomic bombs instead of with guns and rifles, so to speak. However, since realistically one must assume that the technological know-how of such improved weaponry can hardly be kept secret, especially if it is in fact applied, then with the state’s improved instruments for instilling fear the victims’ ways amid means of resisting improve as well. Hence, such advances must be ruled out as an explanation of what must be explained.

[^22]: Witness the all-too-numerous states that go so far as to shoot everyone down without mercy who has committed no other sin than that of trying to leave a territory and move elsewhere!

[^23]: On the intimate relationship between state and war see the important study by Ekkehart Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1985); also Charles Tilly, “War Making and State Making as Organized Crime” in Peter Evans et al., eds., *Bringing the State Back In* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).

[^24]: This insight (which refutes all talk about the impossibility of anarchism in showing that intra-governmental relations are, in fact, a case of—political—anarchy) has been explained in a highly important article by Alfred G. Cuzán, “Do We Ever Really Get Out of Anarchy,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979).

> Wherever earthly governments are established or exist, anarchy is officially prohibited for all members of society, usually referred to as subjects or citizens. They can no longer relate to each other on their own terms…. Rather, all members of society must accept an external “third party”—a government—into their relationships, a third party with the coercive powers to enforce its judgments and punish detractors…. However, such a “third party” arrangement for society is non-existent among those who exercise the power of government themselves. In other words, there is no “third party” to make and enforce judgments among the individual members who make up the third party itself. The rulers still remain in a state of anarchy *vis-à-vis* each other. They settle disputes *among themselves*, without regard for a Government (an entity outside themselves). Anarchy still exists. Only whereas without government it was market or natural anarchy, it is now a *political* anarchy, an anarchy inside power. (Cuzán, pp. 152–53)

[^25]: One of the classic expositors of this idea is David Hume. In his essay, “Of The First Principles of Government,” he writes:

> Nothing appears more surprising to those, who consider human affairs with a philosophical eye, than the easiness with which the many are governed by the few; and the implicit submission, with which men resign their own sentiments and passions to those of their rulers. When we enquire by what means this wonder is effected, we shall find, that as FORCE is always on the side of the governed, the governors have nothing to support them but opinion. It is therefore, on opinion only that government is founded; and this maxim extends to the most despotic and most military governments, as well as to the most free and most popular. The soldan of EGYPT, or the emperor of ROME, might drive his harmless subjects, like brute beasts, against their sentiments and inclination: but he must, at least, have led his *mamalukes*, or *praetorian bands*, like men, by their opinion. (*Essays, Moral, Political and Literary* [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971], p. 19)

[^26]: See on the following in particular also Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right: The Prospects for Liberty” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays*.