Sa pagkilala sa ganitong tiwaling impluwensya sa pampublikong opinyon, kung gayon, ang mga estado ay lalong nakikibahagi sa mga polisiyang redistributibo. Ang bahagi ng paggugol ng gobyerno para sa sibilyang paggastos kumpara sa paggastos pang militar at ang purong pagkonsumo ng gobyerno ay tumataas. Ang huli na mga gastusin ay maaari pa ring madagdagan nang tuloy-tuloy sa ganap na mga tuntunin, at sa katunayan sila ay nagawa na sa halos lahat ng dako hanggang sa araw na ito, ngunit nawalan sila ng kahalagahan sa lahat ng dako kaugnay ng mga gastusin na inilaan sa mga hakbang na redistributionist.[^41]

Depende sa partikular na mga kondisyon ng pampublikong opinyon, ang gayong redistributionist na mga polisiya ay karaniwang sabay-sabay na ipinapalagay ang isa sa dalawang anyo at madalas, tulad ng sa kaso ng Prussia pareho: Sa isang banda ang anyo ng *Sozialpolitik*, ng tinatawag na mga repormang pangkagalingan, sa pangkalahatan ay kinasasangkutan ng redistribusyon ng kita mula sa "mga sagana" sa mga prodyuser tungo sa "mga dukha," at sa kabilang banda ay ang mga kartelisasyon ng negosyo at mga regulasyon, sa pangkalahatan ay nagpapahiwatig ng isang redistribusyon mula sa produktibong "mga dukha" o mga "hindi pa-sagana" tungo sa matatag na "mga sagana na." Sa pagpapakilala ng isang *Sozialpolitik* isang apela ang ginawa sa egalitarian na mga sentimyento at isang malaking bahagi nito ay maaaring pasamain sa pagtanggap ng pagsasamantala ng estado bilang kapalit sa pagpapatupad ng estado ng "katarungang panlipunan." Sa pagpapakilala ng isang polisiya ng kartelisasyon ng negosyo at regulasyon isang apela sa konserbatibong mga damdamin, partikular sa mga burgis na establisyemento, at maaaring dalhin ito upang tanggapin ang hindi kontrakwal na mga paglalaan kapalit ng pangako nito sa pangangalaga ng isang status quo. Ang sosyalismong Egalitarian at konserbatismo sa gayon ay naging istatistikang mga ideolohiya. Nakikipagkumpitensya sila sa isa't isa sa diwa na nagtataguyod sila ng tila iba't ibang mga modelo ng redistribusyon, ngunit ang kanilang mapagkumpitensyang mga pagsisikap ay nagtatagpo at nagsasama sa magkasanib na suporta para sa statismo at istatistikang redistribusyon.

Ang ikalawang pagsasaayos ng estruktura na tumutulong sa pagbalik ng etika ng pribadong ari-arian ay isang pagbabago sa mga konstitusyon ng estado. Bilang tugon sa hamon ng etika ng pribadong pag-aari, binago ng mga estado ang kanilang mga konstitusyon mula sa isang monarkiyang autokrasya o isang aristokratikong oligarkiya tungo sa ngayong pamilyar na uri na isang tinatawag na liberal na demokrasya.[^42] Sa halip na bilang isang institusyon na naghihigpit sa pagpasok sa sarili at/o sa partikular na mga posisyonng pang-gobyerno sa pamamagitan ng isang sistema ng kasta o klase ng batas, isang konstitusyon ng estado ay pinagtibay na sa prinsipyo ay nagbubukas ng bawat posisyon sa gobyerno sa lahat at nagbibigay ng pantay at unibersal na mga karapatan sa pakikilahok at kompetisyon sa paggawa ng patakaran ng estado. Ang bawat isa—hindi lamang ang "maharlika" —ngayon ay tumatanggap ng isang legal na gantimpala sa estado, at ang paglaban sa panuntunan nito ay malamang na mabawasan ng naaayon. Habang ang pagsasamantala at pag-agaw ay tila masama, mukhang mas mababa ang mga ito, ang sangkatauhan bilang kung ano ito, kapag ang isa ay binibigyan ng pagkakataon na lumahok sa proseso nito, at habang ang mga ambisyon ng mga potensyal na mga mamumuno ng kapangyarihan sa loob ng pangkalahatang publiko ay dating dapat na bigo, ngayon ay may isang itinatag na outlet para sa kanila.

Sa pagbabayad ng halaga sa demokratisasyon ng konstitusyon nito, ang estado ay sinira ang mga mahahalagang bahagi ng pampublikong opinyon sa unti-unting pagkawala sa paningin ng pundamental na katotohanan na ang isang gawa ng pagsasamantala at pag-agaw ay nasa lahat ng mga kaanyuhan at mga kahihinatnan ay pareho kahit gaano man at kung kanino man ito ay napagpasyahan at naisakatuparan. Sa halip ay natutukso sila nito na tanggapin ang pagtanaw na ang mga gayong kilos ay lehitimo hangga't ang isa ay ginagarantiyahan ng isang salita sa kanila kung saan may pagkakataon at maaaring sa kahit paanong paraan ay makalahok sa pagpili ng mga tauhan ng estado.[^43]

Ang ma-korupsyong pag-andar na ito ng demokratisasyon bilang isang pampasigla para sa muling pagkabuhay ng kapangyarihan ng estado ay nailarawan ng may mahusay na pananaw ni Bertrand de Jouvenel:

> Mula sa ikalabindalawa hanggang ika-labinwalong siglo ang awtoridad ng gobyerno ay patuloy na lumago. Ang proseso ay naintindihan ng lahat ng nakakita na mangyayari ito; hinikayat sila nito sa walang humpay na protesta at bayolenteng reaksyon. Sa ibang pagkakataon ang paglago nito ay nagpatuloy sa isang pinabilis na tulin, at ang ekstensyon nito ay nagdala ng katumbas na ekstensyon ng digmaan. At ngayon ay hindi na natin naiintindihan ang proseso, hindi na tayo nag-proprotesta, hindi na tayo tumutugon. The quiescence of ours is a new thing, for which Power has to thank the smoke-screen in which it has wrapped itself. Dati ay makikita ito, ipinapahayag sa katauhan ng hari, na hindi ipinagkakaila na siya ang panginoon, at kung kanino nakikita ang mga habag ng tao. Ngayon, nakamaskara sa kawalan ng pagkakakilanlan, inaangkin nito na walang pag-iral sa sarili nito, at para maging ang walang tinutukoy at walang habag na instrumento ng pangkalahatang pagnanais. Ngunit iyon ay maliwanag na isang katha…. Ngayon gaya ng palagian ang Kapangyarihan ay nasa mga kamay ng isang grupo ng mga tao na kumukontrol sa malakas na kapangyarihan…. All that has changed is that it has now been made easy for the ruled to change the personnel of the leading wielders of Power. Tiningnan mula sa isang anggulo, ito ay nagpapahina sa Kapangyarihan, sapagkat ang mga pagnanais na kontrolin ang pamumuhay ng isang lipunan ay maaaring, sa kasiyahan ng lipunan, ay mapapalitan ng iba pang mga pagnanais, kung saan ito ay nakadarama ng higit na pagtitiwala. But, by opening the prospect of Power to all the ambitious talents, this arrangement makes the extension of Power much easier. Under the *ancien régime*, society’s moving spirits, who had, as they knew, no chance of a share of Power, were quick to denounce its smallest encroachment. Now, on the other hand, when everyone is potentially a minister, no one is concerned to cut down an office to which he aspires one day himself, or to put sand in a machine which he means to use himself when his turn comes. Hence it is that there is in the political circles of a modern society a wide complicity in the extension of Power.[^44]

The other two adjustments made by the state in order to overcome its lowest point of popularity and rise to its present size have to do with interstate relations. For one thing, as explained earlier and just mentioned again by de Jouvenel, states qua monopolistic exploiters tend to get involved in interstate warfare. With their internal exploitative power weak, the desire to compensate for these losses by external expansion rises. However, this desire is frustrated by a lack of internal support. The support is created through a policy of redistribution, industrial regulation, and democratization. (In fact, states that do not adopt these measures are bound to lose in any long-lasting warfare!) It is this support that is used as a springboard for a realization of the state’s expansionist desires.

This newfound support takes advantage of the fact that redistribution, regulation, and democratization imply a greater tangible identification of the population with a specific state and thus almost automatically lead to an increase in protectionist if not open antagonistic attitudes toward “outsiders” and that in particular state-privileged producers are by nature hostile to “foreign” competition. This support is transformed by the state and its intellectual bodyguards into a frenzy of nationalism and provides the intellectual framework for the integration of socialist-egalitarian, conservative, and democratic sentiments.[^45]

Backed by such nationalism, states begin on their expansionist course. For more than a century an almost uninterrupted series of wars and imperialist expeditions set in, each one more brutal and destructive than the previous one, with always greater involvement of the noncombative population, culminating in World War I and II but not ending with this. In the name of the socialist, conservative, or democratic nation, and by means of warfare, states have expanded their territories to sizes compared to which even the Roman Empire appears insignificant, and have actually wiped out or brought under foreign rule a steadily increasing number of culturally distinct nations.[^46]

However, not only external expansion of state power is brought about by the ideology of nationalism. War as the natural outgrowth of nationalism is also the means of strengthening the state’s internal powers of exploitation and expropriation. Each war is also an internal emergency situation, and an emergency requires and seems to justify the acceptance of the state’s increasing its control over its own population. Such increased control gained through the creation of emergencies is reduced during peacetime, but it never sinks back to its pre-war levels. Rather, each successfully ended war (and only successful governments can survive) is used by the government and its intellectuals to propagate the idea that it was only because of nationalistic vigilance and expanded governmental powers that the “foreign aggressors” were crushed and one’s own country saved, and that this successful recipe must then be retained in order to be prepared for the next emergency. Led by the just proven “dominant” nationalism, each successful war ends with the attainment of a new peacetime high of governmental controls and thereby further strengthens a government’s appetite for implementing the next winnable international emergency.[^47]

Each new period of peace means a higher level of governmental interference as compared with the previous one: internally in the form of increased restrictions on the range of choices that private property owners are allowed to make regarding their own property; and externally, as regards foreign relations, in the form of higher trade barriers and of increasingly severe restrictions on population movements (most notably on emigration and immigration). Not the least because it is based on increased discrimination against foreigners and foreign trade, any such peace contains the increased risk of the next international conflict, or pressures the affected governments into negotiating bi- or multilateral interstate-agreements aimed at cartelizing their respective power structures and thereby jointly exploiting and expropriating each other’s populations.[^48]

Finally, the fourth adjustment is made necessary by the other three, and again because of the ongoing process of interstate competition, crises, and warfare. It is less of the state’s own making than are redistribution, democratization, and war-making—just as it is not of its own making that there *is* interstate-competition at all. Rather, in fashionable Hayekian terminology, it is the unintended consequence of the fact that short of one state’s domination of the entire world (which is, of course, every state’s dream!) the continued existence of other states keeps exerting a significant constraint on each state’s size and structure.

Whether intended or unintended, this structural adjustment must also be noted if one wishes to fully understand the development that has led to the present world of statism. It is also only by mentioning this adjustment that the question why it is specifically the *tax*-state that has risen to world dominance is finally answered.

It is easy enough to explain how through a series of nationalistic wars during the nineteenth and twentieth century the states of Western Europe and North America could come to dominate the rest of the world and leave their imprint upon it. Notwithstanding the presently booming cultural relativism, the reason for this is the simple fact that these states were the outgrowth of societies with a superior intellectual tradition—that of Western rationalism—with its central ideas of individual freedom and private property, and that this tradition had laid the foundation for the creation of economic wealth far exceeding that existing anywhere else. Because they parasitically drew on such superior economic wealth, it is not at all surprising that these states were then able to battle all others victoriously.

It is also obvious why with the remarkable exception of a number of Pacific countries most of these defeated and reconstituted non-Western states have to this day utterly failed to significantly improve their international stature or even match that of the Western nation states, and have in particular failed to do so after having reached political independence from Western imperialism. With no endogenous tradition of rationalism and liberalism to speak of, such states naturally felt inclined to imitate or adopt the “victorious” ideological imports of socialism, conservatism, democratism, and nationalism, the very ideologies to which these countries’ intellectual elite had been exposed almost exclusively during their studies at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, London, Paris, Berlin, Harvard, and Columbia. As a matter of course, a brew of such each-and-all statist ideologies, unconstrained by a significant tradition of private property ethic, spells economic disaster, and such a fact more or less rules out any prominent role in international politics.[^49]

Yet what—and it is the answer to this that is somewhat less obvious—if the Western states fight each other? What determines the success in these conflicts, and what is bound to cause defeat?

Naturally, redistribution, democratization, and nationalism cannot be cited again here, for assumedly these states have already adopted such policies in order to regain internal strength and prepare for interstate warfare in the first place. Rather, just as it is the relatively stronger tradition of private property ethic that is responsible for these states’ dominance over the non-Western world, so, *ceteris paribus*, is a relatively more liberal policy responsible for their long run success in the struggle for survival among the Western states themselves. Among them, those states which have adjusted their internal redistributionist policies so as to decrease the importance of a conservatively minded policy of economic regulations relative to that of socialistically inclined policy of taxation tend to outstrip their competitors in the arena of international politics.

Regulations through which states either compel or prohibit certain exchanges between two or more private persons as well as acts of taxation are invasions of private property rights. In pursuing both types of redistributionist policies, the states’ representatives increase their own income at the expense of a corresponding income reduction for someone else. However, while by no means less destructive of productive output than taxation, regulations have the peculiar characteristic of requiring the state’s control over economic resources in order to become enforceable without simultaneously increasing the resources at its disposal. In practice, this is to say that regulations require the state’s command over and expenditure of taxes, yet regulations produce no monetary income for the state but only income in the form of the satisfaction of pure power lust (as when A, for no material gains of his own, outlaws that B and C engage in mutually beneficial trade with each other). On the other hand, taxation and a redistribution of tax revenue according to the principle “from Peter to Paul” increases the economic means at a government’s disposal at least by its own “handling-charge” for the act of redistribution but may produce no other satisfaction (apart from the increased appreciation by the Pauls) than that of actually possessing certain economic resources and being able to expend them according to its own whims.[^50]

Clearly, interstate conflicts and war require economic means, and even more resources the more frequent and longer-lasting such events are. In fact, those states which control more ample economic resources expendable on a war-effort will *ceteris paribus* tend to be victorious. Hence, since a policy of taxation, and taxation without regulation, yields a higher monetary return to the state than a policy of regulation, and of taxation cum regulation, states must willy-nilly move in the direction of a comparatively deregulated economy and a comparatively pure tax-state in order to avoid international defeat.

It is this relative advantage in international politics of the tax-state over the regulatory state that explains the rise of the U.S. to the rank of the world’s foremost imperial power.[^51] It also explains the defeat of such highly regulatory states as Nazi-Germany and Fascist-Italy, the relative weakness of the Soviet Union and its allies as compared to the NATO-alliance, and the recent simultaneous moves toward economic deregulation and increased levels of imperialist aggression of the Reagan and, to a lesser extent, the Thatcher governments.

This concludes my praxeologically informed sociological account of the evolution of the present statist world and the rise, in particular, of the modern tax-state. Based on such an understanding let me end with just a few brief remarks of how it is possible to overcome the tax-state.

It cannot be fought by a simple boycott, as could a private business, because an institution devoted to the business of expropriating and exploiting does not respect the negative verdict revealed by boycotts. It also cannot simply be fought by countering its aggression with defensive violence because the state’s aggression is supported by public opinion. Thus, overcoming it depends on a change in public opinion. The private property ethic—the idea that private property is a just institution and the only means of creating economic prosperity, and the view of the state as an outcast institution that is destructive of wealth formation, must be revived and must again inspire people’s minds and hearts. With the rampant statist ideologies of nationalism, democratism, and redistributionism (of either the socialist or the conservative kind), this may sometimes appear hopeless. However, ideas have changed in the past and can change again in the future. In fact, ideas can change instantaneously.[^52] Moreover, the idea of private property has one decisive attraction: it, and only it, is a true reflection of man’s nature as a rational being.[^53]

[^41]: On this trend see Webber and Wildavsky, *A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World*, pp. 588f.; on redistribution in general see also de Jasay, *The State*, chap. 4.

[^42]: On this trend see Reinhard Bendix, *Kings or People* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978).

[^43]: On the social psychology of democracy see Gaetano Mosca, *The Ruling Class* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1939); H.L. Mencken, *Notes on Democracy* (New York: Knopf, 1926); on the tendency of democratic rule to “degenerate” to oligarchic rule see Robert Michels, *Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens* (Stuttgart: Kroener, 1957).

[^44]: Bertrand de Jouvenel, *On Power* (New York: Viking Press, 1949), pp. 9–10.

[^45]: On nationalism, imperialism, colonialism—and their incompatibility with classical liberalism—see Ludwig von Mises, *Liberalism* (San Francisco: Cobden Press, 1985); idem, *Nation, State and Economy* (New York: New York University Press, l983); Joseph A. Schumpeter, *Imperialism and Social Classes* (New York: World Publishing, 1955); Lance E. Davis and Robert A. Huttenback, *Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: The Political Economy of British Imperialism 1860–1912* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).

[^46]: See Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*; Johnson, *Modern Times*.

[^47]: This process is the central topic of Higgs, *Crisis and Leviathan*.

[^48]: The most vicious of such agreements is very likely that of restricting entry for noncriminal persons wanting to immigrate into a given territory—and the chance for those living in this territory to offer employment to them—and of extraditing them back to their home-countries.

[^49]: On the problem of the so-called Third World see Peter T. Bauer and B.S. Yamey, *The Economics of Under-Developed Countries* (London: Nisbet and Co., 1957); P.T. Bauer, *Dissent on Development* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972); idem, *Equality, The Third World and Economic Delusion* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981); Stanislav Andreski, *The African Predicament* (New York: Atherton Press, 1969); idem, *Parasitism and Subversion* (New York: Pantheon, 1966).

[^50]: On regulation and taxation as different forms of aggression against private property and their economics and sociology see Rothbard, *Power and Market*; Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*.

[^51]: On the imperialistic foreign policy of, in particular, the U.S. see Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*, chap. III, p. 1; and Rothbard, *For a New Liberty*, chap. 14.

[^52]: See on this also Etienne de la Boétie, *The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude*, ed. Murray N. Rothbard (New York: Free Life Editions, 1975).

> Resolve to serve no more, and you are at once freed. I do not ask that you place bands upon the tyrant to topple him over, but simply that you support him no longer; then you will behold him, like a great colossus whose pedestals have been pulled away, fall of his own weight and break into pieces. (pp. 52–53)

[^53]: On the—a prioristic—rational justification of the private property ethic see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “From the Economics of Laissez Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); idem, “The Justice of Economic Efficiency,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter, 1988); infra chaps. 8 and 9.