## Ang Klase ng Pagtatasa ng Marxista at Austrian

Gagawin ko ang susunod na kabanatang ito: Una, ipakikita ko ang isang hanay ng mga sanaysay na bumubuo sa matigas na Marxistang kuro kuro ng kasaysayan. At Sinasabi ko na ang lahat ng ito ay tama. Pagkatapos ipapakita ko kung paano ang mga tunay na nagmula sa Marxismo ay isang maling punto. Sa wakas, gusto kong ipakita kung paano ang Austrianismong kaugalian ng Mises-Rothbard ay maaaring magbigay ng tama ngunit katangi-tanging iba't ibang paliwanag sa kanilang katumpakan.

Ako ay magsisimula sa matigas na paraang paniniwala ng Marxista

1. Ang kasaysayan ng sangkatauhan ay ang kasaysayan ng mga pakikibaka ng Uri. "<sup id="fnref:2"><a href="#fn:2" class="footnote-ref"> 2 </ 0> Ito ang kasaysayan ng pakikibaka sa pagitan ng maliit at malaking uri ng pinagsasamantalahan. Ang pangunahing anyo ng pagsasamantala ay pang-kabuhayan: Ang Inilalabas at naghaharing uring bahaging pag gawa at pagbubuhos ng pinagsamantalahan o, gaya ng sinasabi ng mga Marxista, "inilalaan nito ang isang panlipunang sobrang kalakal at ginagamit ito para sa sarili nitong mga layunin ng konsumtum."</li> 
    
    <li>
      Ang naghaharing uri ay pinag-isa ng pangkaraniwang kapakanan nito sa pagtataguyod sa kalagayan nito at pag-malaki at mapagsamantalang paggamit ng sobrang kalakal. Hindi ito sinasadyang nagbibigay ng kapangyarihan o kita sa pagsasamantala. Sa halip, ang anumang pagkawala sa kapangyarihan o kita ay dapat na labanan mula dito sa pamamagitan ng pakikibaka, ang resulta sa huli ay nakasalalay sa antas ng kamalayan ng pinagsasamantalahan, ibig sabihin, sa kung o hindi at gaano kalawak ang pinagsasamantalahan ay alam nila ang kanilang sariling kalagayan at sinasadya na nagkakaisa sa ibang mga miyembro ng antas na may karaniwang pagsalungat sa pagsasamantala.
    </li>
    
    <li>
      Ang panuntunan sa klase ay nagpapakita mismo ng mga natatanging kaayusan tungkol sa pagtatalaga ng mga karapatan sa pag-aari o, sa takdang panahon Marxist, sa natatangi na "mga relasyon ng pag gawa." Upang maprotektahan ang mga kaayusan o relasyon sa paglikha, ang mga naghaharing uri at porma ay nasa utos ng estado bilang ang kagamitan ng pamimilit. Ang estado ay nagpapatupad at tumutulong sa pagpaparami ng isang uri ng kaayusan sa pamamagitan ng pangangasiwa ng isang paraan ng "hustisya ng klase," at tinutulungan nito ang paglikha at ang tulong ng isang malayang pagsasahimig na idinisenyo upang ipahiram ang pagiging lehitimo sa pagkakaroon ng tuntunin ng klase.
    </li>
    
    <li>
      Sa Panloob, ang proseso ng labanan at sa loob ng naghaharing uri ay bumubuo ng isang pagkahilig patungo sa pagtaas ng konsentrasyon at pangkalahatan. Ang paraang multipolar ay pagsasamantala ng unti-unti na pinalitan ng oligarkiko o monopolistikong isa. Ang mas kaunting sentro na pagsasamantala ay nananatili sa operasyon, at ang mga ginagawa nito ay lalong isinama sa isang kaayusang hierarchical. Sa labas (ibig sabihin, tungkol sa pandaigdigang sistema), ang proseso ng sentralisasyon na ito (at higit na mas pinalalakas at mas umunlad ito) ay humantong sa mga digmaang imperyalistang pandaigdigan at ang pagpapalawak ng nasasakupang mapagsamantalang patakaran.
    </li>
    
    <li>
      Sa wakas, na ang sentralisasyon at paglawak ng mapagsamantalang patakaran ay unti-unti na lumalapit sa pinakahuling limitasyon ng dominasyon ng mundo, lalong nagiging hindi tugma ang panuntunan ng klase sa karagdagang pag-unlad at pagpapabuti ng "mga produktibong lakas." Ang pagiging mas mabisa at lumilikha ng " layunin kalagayan "para sa paglitaw ng isang paraang pag aalsa kamalayan ng pinagsamantalahan. Ang sitwasyon ay nagiging hinog para sa pagtatatag ng isang walang-lipunan, ang "pagkalanta ng antas," ang kapalit ng pamahalaan ng mga tao sa pamamagitan ng pangangasiwa ng mga bagay <sup id="fnref:3"><a href="#fn:3" class="footnote-ref"> 3 </ 0> at, bilang resulta nito, ng pang-kabuhayang kasaganaan.</li> </ol> 
      
      <p>
        Ang lahat ng mga ito ay puweding mabigyan ng isang mahusay na pagbibigay-katarungan, tulad ng ipapakita ko. Sa kasamaang palad, gayunpaman, Marxism, na sumasailalim sa lahat ng mga ito, na ginawa ng higit sa iba pang pamamaraang kaisipan upang siraan ang kanilang katumpakan sa pang gagaling mula sa isang malinaw n kuro kuro ng pagsasamantala.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Ano itong kuro kuro ng Marxistang pagsasamantala? Ayon kay Marx, ang mga precapitalistang paraang panlipunan bilang pang-aalipin at pyudalismo ay nailalarawan sa pamamagitan ng pagsasamantala. Sa mga ito walang pakikipag-away. Para sa lahat, ang alipin ay hindi isang malayang manggagawa, at hindi siya maaaring masabi na makamit mula sa pagiging inaalipin. Rather, in being enslaved his utility is reduced at the expense of an increase in wealth appropriated by the slave master. The interest of the slave and that of the slave owner are indeed antagonistic. The same is true as regards the interests of the feudal lord who extracts a land rent from a peasant who works on land homesteaded by himself (i.e., the peasant). The lord’s gains are the peasant’s losses. It is also undisputed that slavery as well as feudalism indeed hamper the development of productive forces. Neither slave nor serf will be as productive as they would be without slavery or serfdom.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        The genuinely new Marxist idea is that essentially nothing is changed as regards exploitation under capitalism (if the slave becomes a free laborer), or if the peasant decides to farm land homesteaded by someone else and pays rent in exchange for doing so. To be sure, Marx, in the famous chapter 24 of the first volume of his <em>Kapital</em>, titled “The So-called Original Accumulation,” gives a historical account of the emergence of capitalism which makes the point that much or even most of the initial capitalist property is the result of plunder, enclosure, and conquest. Similarly, in chapter 25, on the “Modern Theory of Colonialism,” the role of force and violence in exporting capitalism to the, as we would nowadays say, Third World is heavily emphasized. Admittedly, all this is generally correct, and insofar as it is there can be no quarrel with labeling such capitalism exploitative. Yet one should be aware of the fact that here Marx is engaged in a trick. In engaging in historical investigations and arousing the reader’s indignation regarding the brutalities underlying the formation of many capitalist fortunes, he actually side-steps the issue at hand. He distracts from the fact that his thesis is really an entirely different one: namely, that even if one were to have “clean” capitalism so to speak (one in which the original appropriation of capital were the result of nothing else but homesteading), work and savings, the capitalist who hired labor to be employed with this capital would nonetheless be engaged in exploitation. Indeed, Marx considered the proof of this thesis his most important contribution to economic analysis.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        What, then, is his proof of the exploitative character of a clean capitalism?
      </p>
      
      <p>
        It consists in the observation that the factor prices, in particular the wages paid to laborers by the capitalist, are lower than the output prices. The laborer, for instance, is paid a wage that represents consumption goods which can be produced in three days, but he actually works five days for his wage and produces an output of consumption goods that exceeds what he receives as remuneration. The output of the two extra days, the surplus value in Marxist terminology, is appropriated by the capitalist. Hence, according to Marx, there is exploitation.<fnref target="4" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        What is wrong with this analysis?<fnref target="5" /> The answer becomes obvious, once it is asked why the laborer would possibly agree to such a deal! He agrees because his wage payment represents present goods—while his own labor services represent only future goods—and he values present goods more highly. After all, he could also decide not to sell his labor services to the capitalist and then map the full value of his output himself. But this would of course imply that he would have to wait longer for any consumption goods to become available to him. In selling his labor services he demonstrates that he prefers a smaller amount of consumption goods now over a possibly larger one at some future date. On the other hand, why would the capitalist want to strike a deal with the laborer? Why would he want to advance present goods (money) to the laborer in exchange for services that bear fruit only later? Obviously, he would not want to pay out, for instance, $100 now if he were to receive the same amount in one year’s time. In that case, why not simply hold on to it for one year and receive the extra benefit of having actual command over it during the entire time? Instead, he must expect to receive a larger sum than $100 in the future in order to give up $100 now in the form of wages paid to the laborer. He must expect to be able to earn a profit, or more correctly an interest return. He is also constrained by time preference, i.e., the fact that an actor invariably prefers earlier over later goods, in yet another way. For if one can obtain a larger sum in the future by sacrificing a smaller one in the present, why then is the capitalist not engaged in more saving than he actually is? Why does he not hire more laborers than he does, if each one of them promises an additional interest return? The answer again should be obvious: because the capitalist is a consumer, as well, and cannot help being one. The amount of his savings and investing is restricted by the necessity that he, too, like the laborer, requires a supply of present goods “large enough to secure the satisfaction of all those wants the satisfaction of which during the waiting time is considered more urgent than the advantages which a still greater lengthening of the period of production would provide.”<fnref target="6" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        What is wrong with Marx’s theory of exploitation, then, is that he does not understand the phenomenon of time preference as a universal category of human action.<fnref target="7" /> That the laborer does not receive his “full worth” has nothing to do with exploitation but merely reflects the fact that it is impossible for man to exchange future goods against present ones except at a discount. Contrary to the case of slave and slave master where the latter benefits at the expense of the former, the relationship between the free laborer and the capitalist is a mutually beneficial one. The laborer enters the agreement because, given his time preference, he prefers a smaller amount of present goods over a larger future one; and the capitalist enters it because, given his time preference, he has a reverse preference order and ranks a larger future amount of goods more highly than a smaller present one. Their interests are not antagonistic but harmonious. Without the capitalist’s expectation of an interest return, the laborer would be worse off having to wait longer than he wishes to wait; and without the laborer’s preference for present goods the capitalist would be worse off having to resort to less roundabout and less efficient production methods than those which he desires to adopt. Nor can the capitalist wage system be regarded as an impediment to the further development of the forces of production, as Marx claims. If the laborer were not permitted to sell his labor services and the capitalist to buy them, output would not be higher but lower, because production would have to take place with relatively reduced levels of capital accumulation.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Under a system of socialized production, quite contrary to Marx’s proclamations, the development of productive forces would not reach new heights but would instead sink dramatically.<fnref target="8" /> For obviously, capital accumulation must be brought about by definite individuals at definite points in time and space through homesteading, producing and/or saving. In each case it is brought about with the expectation that it will lead to an increase in the output of future goods. The value an actor attaches to his capital reflects the value he attaches to all expected future incomes attributable to its cooperation and discounted by his rate of time preference. If, as in the case of collectively owned factors of production, an actor is no longer granted exclusive control over his accumulated capital and hence over the future income to be derived from its employment, but partial control instead is assigned to nonhomesteaders, nonproducers, and nonsavers, the value for him of the expected income and hence that of the capital goods is reduced. His effective rate of time preference will rise and there will be less homesteading of scarce resources, and less saving for the maintenance of existing resources and the production of new capital goods. The period of production, the roundaboutness of the production structure, will be shortened, and relative impoverishment will result.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        If Marx’s theory of capitalist exploitation and his ideas on how to end exploitation and establish universal prosperity are false to the point of being ridiculous, it is clear that any theory of history which can be derived from it must be false, too. Or if it should be correct, it must have been derived incorrectly. Instead of going through the lengthier task of explaining all of the flaws in the Marxist argument as it sets out from its theory of capitalist exploitation and ends with the theory of history which I presented earlier, I will take a shortcut here. I will now outline in the briefest possible way the correct—Austrian, Misesian-Rothbardian—theory of exploitation; give an explanatory sketch of how this theory makes sense out of the class theory of history; and highlight along the way some key differences between this class theory and the Marxist one and also point out some intellectual affinities between Austrianism and Marxism stemming from their common conviction that there does indeed exist something like exploitation and a ruling class.<fnref target="9" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        The starting point for the Austrian exploitation theory is plain and simple, as it should be. Actually, it has already been established through the analysis of the Marxist theory: Exploitation characterized the relationship between slave and slave master and serf and feudal lord. But no exploitation was found possible under a clean capitalism. What is the principle difference between these two cases? The answer is: the recognition or nonrecognition of the homesteading principle. The peasant under feudalism is exploited because he does not have exclusive control over land that he homesteaded, and the slave because he has no exclusive control over his own homesteaded body. If, contrary to this, everyone has exclusive control over his own body (is a free laborer, that is) and acts in accordance with the homesteading principle, there can be no exploitation. It is logically absurd to claim that a person who homesteads goods not previously homesteaded by anybody else, or who employs such goods in the production of future goods, or who saves presently homesteaded or produced goods in order to increase the future supply of goods, could thereby exploit anybody. Nothing has been taken away from anybody in this process and additional goods have actually been created. And it would be equally absurd to claim that an agreement between different homesteaders, savers and producers regarding their nonexploitatively appropriated goods or services could possibly contain any foul play, then. Instead, exploitation takes place whenever any <em>deviation</em> from the homesteading principle occurs. It is exploitation whenever a person successfully claims partial or full control over scarce resources which he has not homesteaded, saved or produced, and which he has not acquired contractually from a previous producer-owner. Exploitation is the expropriation of homesteaders, producers and savers by late-coming nonhomesteaders, nonproducers, nonsavers and noncontractors; it is the expropriation of people whose property claims are grounded in work and contract by people whose claims are derived from thin air and who disregard others’ work and contracts.<fnref target="10" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Needless to say, exploitation thus defined is in fact an integral part of human history. One can acquire and increase wealth either through homesteading, producing, saving, or contracting, or by expropriating homesteaders, producers, savers or contractors. There are no other ways. Both methods are natural to mankind. Alongside homesteading, producing and contracting, there have always been nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. And in the course of economic development, just as producers and contractors can form firms, enterprises and corporations, so can exploiters combine to large-scale exploitation enterprises, governments and states. The ruling class (which may again be internally stratified) is initially composed of the members of such an exploitation firm. And with a ruling class established over a given territory and engaged in the expropriation of economic resources from a class of exploited producers, the center of all history indeed becomes the struggle between exploiters and the exploited. History, then, correctly told, is essentially the history of the victories and defeats of the rulers in their attempt to maximize exploitatively appropriated income and of the ruled in their attempts to resist and reverse this tendency. It is in this assessment of history that Austrians and Marxists agree, and it is why a notable intellectual affinity between Austrian and Marxist historical investigations exists. Both oppose a historiography which recognizes only action or interaction, economically and morally all on a par; and both oppose a historiography that instead of adopting such a valueneutral stand thinks that one’s own arbitrarily introduced subjective value judgments have to provide the foil for one’s historical narratives. Rather, history must be told in terms of freedom and exploitation, parasitism and economic impoverishment, private property and its destruction—otherwise it is told false.<fnref target="11" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        While productive enterprises come into or go out of existence because of voluntary support or its absence, a ruling class never comes to power because there is a demand for it, nor does it abdicate when abdication is demonstrably demanded. One cannot say by any stretch of the imagination that homesteaders, producers, savers and contractors have demanded their expropriation. They must be coerced into accepting it, and this proves conclusively that the exploitation firm is not in demand at all. Nor can one say that a ruling class can be brought down by abstaining from transactions with it in the same way as one can bring down a productive enterprise. For the ruling class acquires its income through nonproductive and noncontractual transactions and thus is unaffected by boycotts. Rather, what makes the rise of an exploitation firm possible, and what alone can in turn bring it down is a specific state of public opinion or, in Marxist terminology, a specific state of class consciousness.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        An exploiter creates victims, and victims are potential enemies. It is possible that this resistance can be lastingly broken down by force in the case of a group of men exploiting another group of roughly the same size. However, more than force is needed to expand exploitation over a population many times its own size. For this to happen, a firm must also have public support. A majority of the population must accept the exploitative actions as legitimate. This acceptance can range from active enthusiasm to passive resignation. But it must be acceptance in the sense that a majority must have given up the idea of actively or passively resisting any attempt to enforce nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. The class consciousness must be low, undeveloped and fuzzy. Only as long as this state of affairs lasts is there still room for an exploitative firm to prosper even if no actual demand for it exists. Only if and insofar as the exploited and expropriated develop a clear idea of their own situation and are united with other members of their class through an ideological movement which gives expression to the idea of a classless society where all exploitation is abolished, can the power of the ruling class be broken. Only if, and insofar as, a majority of the exploited public becomes consciously integrated into such a movement and accordingly displays a common outrage over all nonproductive or noncontractual property acquisitions, shows a contempt for everyone who engages in such acts, and deliberately contributes nothing to help make them successful (not to mention actively trying to obstruct them), can its power be brought to crumble.
      </p>
      
      <footnotes>
        <fn name="1">
          <p>
            See on the following Karl Marx and Frederic Engels, <em>The Communist Manifesto</em> (1848); Karl Marx, <em>Das Kapital</em>, 3 vols. (1867; 1885; 1894); as contemporary Marxists, Ernest Mandel, <em>Marx’s Economic Theory</em> (London: Merlin, 1962); idem, <em>Late Capitalism</em> (London: New Left Books, 1975); Paul Baran and Paul Sweezy, <em>Monopoly Capital</em> (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1966); from a non-Marxist perspective, Leszek Kolakowski, <em>Main Currents of Marxism</em> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995); G. Wetter, <em>Sovietideologie heute</em> (Frankfurt/M.: Fischer, 1962), vol. 1; W. Leonhard, <em>Sovietideologie heute</em> (Frankfurt/M.: Fischer, 1962), vol. 2.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="2">
          <p>
            Marx and Engels, <em>The Communist Manifesto</em> (section 1).
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="3">
          <p>
            <em>The Communist Manifesto</em> (section 2, last 2 paragraphs); Frederic Engels, <em>Von tier Autorität</em>, in Karl Marx and Frederic Engels, <em>Ausgewählte Schriften</em>, 2 vols. (East Berlin: Dietz, 1953), vol. I, p. 606; idem, <em>Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft</em>, ibid., vol. 2, p. 139.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="4">
          <p>
            See Marx, <em>Das Kapital</em>, vol. I; the shortest presentation is his <em>Lohn, Preis, Profit</em> (1865). Actually, in order to prove the more specific Marxist thesis that exclusively the owner of labor services is exploited (but not the owner of the other originary factor of production: land), yet another argument would be needed. For if it were true that the discrepancy between factor and output prices constitutes an exploitative relation, this would only show that the capitalist who rents labor services from an owner of labor, and land services from an owner of land would exploit either labor, or land, or labor and land simultaneously. It is the labor theory of value, of course, which is supposed to provide the missing link here by trying to establish labor as the sole source of value. I will spare myself the task of refuting this theory. Few enough remain today, even among those claiming to be Marxists, who do not recognize the faultiness of the labor theory of value. Rather, I will accept for the sake of argument the suggestion made, for instance, by the self-proclaimed “analytical Marxist” John Roemer (<em>A General Theory of Exploitation and Class</em> [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982]; idem, <em>Value, Exploitation and Class</em> [London: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1985]) that the theory of exploitation can be separated analytically from the labor theory of value; and that a “generalized commodity exploitation theory” can be formulated which can be justified regardless of whether or not the labor theory of value is true. I want to demonstrate that the Marxist theory of exploitation is nonsensical even if one were to absolve its proponents from having to prove the labor theory of value and, indeed, even if the labor theory of value were true. Even a generalized commodity exploitation theory provides no escape from the conclusion that the Marxist theory of exploitation is dead wrong.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="5">
          <p>
            See on the following Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, <em>The Exploitation Theory of Socialism-Communism</em> (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1975); idem, <em>Shorter Classics of Böhm-Bawerk</em> (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1962).
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="6">
          <p>
            Ludwig von Mises, <em>Human Action</em> (Chicago: Regnery, 1966), p. 407; see also Murray N. Rothbard, <em>Man, Economy, and State</em> (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), pp. 300–01.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="7">
          <p>
            See on the time preference theory of interest in addition to the works cited in notes 5 and 6; also Frank Fetter, <em>Capital, Interest and Rent</em> (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977).
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="8">
          <p>
            See on the following Hans-Hermann Hoppe, <em>A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism</em> (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989); idem, “Why Socialism Must Fail,” <em>Free Market</em> (July 1988); idem, “The Economics and Sociology of Taxation,” <em>Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines</em> (1990); supra chap. 2.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="9">
          <p>
            Mises’s contributions to the theory of exploitation and class are unsystematic. However, throughout his writings he presents sociological and historical interpretations that are class analyses, if only implicitly. Noteworthy here is in particular his acute analysis of the collaboration between government and banking elite in destroying the gold standard in order to increase their inflationary powers as a means of fraudulent, exploitative income and wealth redistribution in their own favor. See for instance his <em>Monetary Stabilization and Cyclical Policy</em> (1928) in idem, <em>On the Manipulation of Money and Credit,</em> ed. Percy Greaves (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Free Market Books 1978); idem, <em>Socialism</em> (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1981), chap. 20; idem, <em>The Clash of Group Interests and Other Essays</em> (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 7, 1978). Yet Mises does not give systematic status to class analysis and exploitation theory because he ultimately misconceives of exploitation as merely an intellectual error which correct economic reasoning can dispel. He fails to fully recognize that exploitation is also and probably even more so a moral-motivational problem that exists regardless of all economic reasoning. Rothbard adds his insight to the Misesian structure of Austrian economics and makes the analysis of power and power elites an integral part of economic theory and historical-sociological explanations; and he systematically expands the Austrian case against exploitation to include ethics in addition to economic theory, i.e., a theory of justice next to a theory of efficiency, such that the ruling class can also be attacked as immoral. For Rothbard’s theory of power, class and exploitation, see in particular his <em>Power and Market</em> (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977); idem, <em>For a New Liberty</em> (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, <em>The Mystery of Banking</em> (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983); idem, <em>America’s Great Depression</em> (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975). On important nineteenth-century forerunners of Austrian class analysis, see Leonard Liggio, “Charles Dunoyer and French Classical Liberalism,” <em>Journal of Libertarian Studies</em> 1, no. 3 (1977); Ralph Raico, “Classical Liberal Exploitation Theory,” <em>Journal of L ibertarian Studies</em> 1, no. 3 (1977); Mark Weinburg, “The Social Analysis of Three Early 19th Century French Liberals: Say, Comte, and Dunoyer,” <em>Journal of Libertarian Studies</em> 2, no. 1 (1978); Joseph T. Salerno, “Comment on the French Liberal School,” <em>Journal of Libertarian Studies</em> 2, no. 1 (1978); David M. Hart, “Gustave de Molinari and the Anti-Statist Liberal Tradition,” 2 parts, <em>Journal of Libertarian Studies</em> 5, nos. 3 and 4 (1981).
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="10">
          <p>
            See on this also Hoppe, <em>A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism</em>; idem, “The Justice of Economic Efficiency,” <em>Austrian Economics Newsletter</em> 1 (1988); infra chap. 9; idem, “The Ultimate Justification of the Private Property Ethics,” <em>Liberty</em> (September 1988): infra chap. 10.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="11">
          <p>
            See on this theme also Lord (John) Acton, <em>Essays in the History of Liberty</em> (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1985); Franz Oppenheimer, <em>System der Soziologie</em>, vol. II: <em>Der Staat</em> (Stuttgart: G. Fischer, 1964); Alexander Rüstow, <em>Freedom and Domination</em> (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1986).
          </p>
        </fn>
      </footnotes>