Pangalawa, ang paggamit ng mga pangpalit ng pera kaysa sa aktuwal na ginto ay kinakailangang maging sistematikong mahimuk at ang nasabing mga tendensiya na maback up ang pagganap ng legal na mga maselang batas. Ang paghuwad na proseso ay ngayong naging mas kaunti ang halaga. Kesa magkaroon ng remint na ginto, ang tanging mga papel na tiket ang kailanang ma-print.

Gayunpaman, ang problema ay nakatalakay na sa dumaang mga habilin. Hanggang sa ang sistema ng libreng pagbabanko ay nasa operasyon, ang huwad na mga nota ay hindi mahahadlangan sa pagbalik nito sa bagong nag-isyu kasama ang rekwest ng pagtubos, at siya ay hindi maaring - kahit hindi sa walang kontraktibong pagsasaayos—mapatupad ang kanyang mga obligasyon. Upang malagpasan ang handlan na ito, sa susunod na hakbang ang estado ay kinakailangang mag-monopolays sa sistema ng bangko o puwersahin ang mga kalabang banko patungo sa isang kartel sa ilalim ng tutelahe sa sarili nitong estadong-pinapagana ng banko sentral. Kapag ito ay nasa utos ng isang na-monopolays o na-kartela na sistema ng bangko, ang estado ay maaring malagay sa isinaayos at ang joint na paghuwad ng proseso sa kabuuang sistema ng bangko patungo sa epektong maiiwasan ang panganib nito.

Sa susunod na hakbang ang ginto ay kinakailangang ma-nasyonalisa, i.e., ang estado ay dapat maghihingi sa lahat ng mga bangko na magdeposit sa kanilang ginto sa bangko sentral at magsagawa ng kanilang hanap-buhay na ekslusibo sa pera na pinagpalit kesa ginto. Sa paraang ito ang ginto ay nawawala sa merkado bilang isang aktuwal na ginamit na paraan ng pagpapalit at gayon sa araw-araw na transaksyon ay papalaking karakterisado gamit ang sentral na banknotes.

Sa katapusan, ang ginto na napawala na sa pangingin at sa loob ng solong posesyon ng estado, ang estado ay kinakailangang magputol ng huling tali sa ginto sa pamamagitan ng pagtulusira sa sariling kontraktuwal na mga obligasyon at magdeklara sa mga notes na hindi na matubos. Ginawa sa mga nagibang mga ginto, na bilang isang pamantayan ng pangangalakal ng pera ay paunang gumawa nitong posible na ang mga notes na papel ay puwedeng magtamo ng kahit anong kapangyarihan ng pagbili, isang pamantayan ng purong fiat na pera ang natayo at ngayon ay puwede nang mapatuloy sa operasyon, sa haba ng huling pagpapalakad ng estado sa hangganang kapangyarihan ng paghuwad na inilulunsad nito.

Ang layunin ng pagkompleto sa autonimyang pag-huwad ay parehong dumidikta ng estratehiya na kinakailangan makuha sa saykologikal na paghaharap. Malinaw, na sa paglapit ng tunay na sariling layunin ang estado ay gagawa ng mga biktima at ngayon ito ay mangangailangan din ng pabor sa pampublikong opinyon. Ang pagbangon sa lubos na kapangyarihan ng paghuwad ay kinakailangang mapasama sa pamamagitan ng restributatibong mga sukatan na makakalikha ng suporta na kinakailangan upang malagpasan ang lahat ng mga paparating nga puwersa ng nanlalaban. Ito ay dapat na maghanap ng mga kakampi.

Patungkol sa monopolisasyon ng estado sa batas at kautusan, trapiko, komunikasyon at edukasyon, at ang demokratisasyon ng sariling estraktura ng organisasyon—habang ito ay malinaw na silang lahat ay redistributadong mga sukatan at nasabing magpapahiwatig ng mga nakakuha at mga nawalan ng tiyak na mga klase ng pagtitipon: maari lamang na mayroong mga nakakuha (o mga nawalan) sa kabilang mga klase: sa loob ng isang klase ng pagtitipon ay maari lamang na mayroong mga nakakuha at mga nawalan; at ang pattern ng muling pagpapamahagi ay maaring magbago sa takbo ng oras. Sa lahat ng mga kasong ito ang ugnay sa gitna ng mulang pagpapamahagi ng gastos ng estado at ng kanilang mga payoff ay indirekta lamang: kahit man hindi tukoy na gastos sa pang-edukasyon, halimbawa, ang pay off sa mga termino ng pag-akyat na estado ng kita ay maari lamang makita sa susunod na petsa; at kahit na ito ay magiging mahirap na mapalagay ang resulta sa isang tiyak na kadahilanan. Sa kaso ng monopolisasyon ng pera at bangko, sa ibang dako, na kung sino ang sa labas ng aparato sa estado nito ay magiging benepaktor sa redestribyutibong mga patakaran at kung sino ang mga nawalan ay magiging malinaw ora mismo; at ang sosyolohikal na mga benepaktor ay madaling matukoy gamit ang tiyak na klase ng pagtitipon. Sa kasong ito ang koneksyon sa loob ng pagpapamalakad palabas ng estado ng redestribyutibong mga pabor at sa sarili nitong pagpapayaman ay direkta at saradong na-serkit; at ang pagkatangi ng mga kadahilanan ay klaro: Ang estado ay napilit na gumawa ng mga bangko at ng klase ng pagtitipon ng mga bankero na maging akomplisado sa pamamgitan ng pagpapahintulot sa kanila na sumali sa kanilang paghuwad na mga operasyon at sa ganun ay mapalago ang kanilang mga sarili kasama ng pagpapalago sa sarili ng estado.

Ang mga bankero ay ang unang mga tao na magiging mulat sa mga pagsubok ng estado at paghuhuwad. Kapag wala ang mga espesyal na mga insentibo na salungat sila ay mawawalan ng rason na sumuporta sa nasabing mga aksyon at sa bawat rason mapalitaw at matigil sila agad-agad. At ang estado ay hindi pupunta lamang sa kahit anong oposisyon dito: mga bangkero, dahil ang kanilang eksoltadong posisyon sa ekonomikang buhay at sa partikular dahil sa kanilang malayong-pagabot ng pagka-interkonektado bilang isang propesyonal na grupo na nagreresulta mula sa kanilang katangiang negosyo bilang mga tagahusay ng interspasyal at intertemporal na mga pagpapalit, ay magiging pinakakilabot na oposisyon na makakasalamuha ng isang tao. Ang insentibo na kinakailang upang mapaikot ang nasabing potensyal na mga kalaban bilang mga natural na mga kakampi ay ang alok ng estado upang maputol sila sa kanilang sariling mga pagdarayang makinasyon. Ang pagkapamilyar sa mga ideya ng paghuhuwad at malaking potensyal para sa sariling pag-unlad, pero alam, din, na mayroon walang pagkakataon na makipagkayari dito kahit hindi magpatakbo ng agad na panganib ng pagka-bankrupt sa ilalim ng libre, kompetitibong pagbangko at ang pamantayan ng ginto, ang mga bangkero ay nakaharap sa isang halos di malabanang temptasyon. Paglakad kasama sa patakaran ng estado sa monopolisasyon ng pera at pagbangko ay nangangahulugan na matatamo ang mga sariling pangarap ng tao na mabilis na yumaman. Hindi lang ang estado ang papasok sa loob ng kanyang sarili kapag ang pamantayan ng purong fiat na pera ay matatag na. Ibinibigay na sila ay ipinagkaayon sa pribilehiyo ng estado na maghuhuwad bilang karagdagan sa sariling nahuwad na mga nota sa ilalim ng isang monetaryong rehime na bababa sa 100-porsyentong-reserba ng pagbangko, kasama ang bangko sentral na gumagalaw bilang huling madulugan na tagahuwad ng mga bangko ay maari lamang na masyadong mapadali ang paghimuk patungkol sa establesimiento sa nasabing monetaryong sistema dahil sa kanilang pinaka-ultimatong layunin at bilang isang panlahat na panacea.[^16]

Sa ekonomikang aspeto, ang kowalisyong ito sa pamamagitan ng estado—bilang dominanteng kasama—at sa sistema ng pagbangko—bilang apilyado nito—nagpapatungo sa permanenteng impleysyon (inaampat lamang ng imperatibo na hindi sobrang gawin ito at nagdudulot ng pagbreakdown sa kabuuang monetaryong sistema), upang makredit ang pagpapalaki at panay na recurring na mga boom-bust saykol, at para sa isang malubay ng walang interapsyong kita at yaman na redistribusyon sa estado at sa pabor ng bangko.

Still more important, however, are the sociological implications of this alliance: With its formation a ruling class whose interests are tied in closely with those of the state is established within civil society. Through its cooperation the state can now extend its coercive power to practically every area of society.

Before the establishment of the state-banking alliance, the sociological separation between state and society, i.e., between an exploitative ruling class and a class of exploited producers, is almost complete and clearly visible. Here is a civil society that produces all economic wealth; and there is the state and its representatives who draw parasitically on what others have produced. People are members either of civil society or the state and see their own interests connected with either the former or the latter. To be sure, there are then redistributive activities going on which favor parts of society at the expense of others and which help divert interests from the pursuit of economic integration to that of supporting exploitation. Yet social corruption is unsystematic at this stage. It is not corruption of social classes which are connected society-wide, but rather corruption of various disparate and dispersed individuals or groups. And these interests are only connected to those of the state rather tenuously through certain specific redistributive state activities, rather than through a direct cash-connection.

With the formation of a state-banking alliance all this becomes different. A cash-connection between parts of civil society and the state exists—and nothing ties people more closely together than joint financial interests. Moreover, this connection is established between the state and what can be identified not only as a closely interconnected social class, but as one of the most widely influential and powerful ones. In fact, it is not just the banks who join interests with the state and its policy of exploitation. The banks’ major clients, the business establishment and the leaders of industry become deeply integrated in the state’s counterfeiting schemes, too. For it is they who, apart from state and banks, are the earliest receivers of most of the regularly created counterfeit money. In receiving it before it gradually ripples through the economic system, and thereby changes relative prices as well as increases the overall price level, and in receiving credit at fraudulently lowered interest rates, they too enrich themselves at the expense of all savers and all later recipients or nonrecipients of this money.[^17]

Moreover, this financial coalition between the industrial establishment, banks, and the state tends to be reinforced by each successive course of events. The credit expansion leads to increased investment and—since it is not covered by an increase in genuine savings—will inevitably result in a corrective contraction. In order to avoid losses or even bankruptcy the bank’s clients will approach the banking system with an increased demand for liquidity (i.e., money). Naturally, to avoid losses of their own the banks are eager to help their clients out—and the more so the more established they are as clients. Unable to do this on their own, they turn to the state and its central bank. And the state, then, being offered another chance at its own enrichment, accepts and provides the banking system, and by extension the business establishment, with the needed liquidity by means of a new round of counterfeiting. The alliance is renewed, and the state has reaffirmed its dominant role by having saved the established banking and the industrial elite from crumbling in the face of economic competition and allowing them instead to preserve the status quo or even further increase the wealth already concentrated in their hands. There is reason to be thankful and to reciprocate with invigorated public support for the state and its propaganda.

To be sure, this coalition between the state and the economic power elite by no means implies a complete identity of interests. The various established industrial enterprises may have different or even contrary interests; and the same is true for the banks. Similarly, the interests of banks and business clients may in many respects be different. Nor do the interests of the industrial elite or the banks coincide completely with those of the state. For after all, banks as well as industrial enterprises are also in the “normal” business of making money through production and productive exchanges—whatever other sources of income acquisition may be available to them. And in this function their interests may well clash with the state’s desire for taxes, for instance. Nonetheless, the establishment of a system of monopolized money and banking still creates one interest common to all of them: an interest in the preservation of the state apparatus and the institution of political (i.e., exploitative) means of income appropriation as such. Not only could the state and its central bank destroy any commercial bank and, indirectly, practically any industrial enterprise; this threat is more severe the more established a business is. The state could also help any and all of them get richer, and more so if they are already rich. Hence, the more there is to lose from opposition and to gain from compliance, the more intensive will be the attempts by the economic power elite to infiltrate the state apparatus and have the state leaders assume financial interests in the business world. Bankers and industrialists become politicians; and politicians take positions in banking and industry. A social system emerges and is increasingly characteristic of the modern world in which the state and a closely associated class of banking and business leaders exploit everyone else.[^18][^19]

[^16]: On the enthusiastic participation of the banking elite in the creation of the Federal Reserve System, see Rothbard, *Mystery of Banking*, chaps. XV, XVI.

[^17]: On the formation of the state-banking-business coalition, see Gabriel Kolko, *The Triumph of Conservatism* (Chicago: Free Press, 1967); *Railroads and Regulations* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1965); James Weinstein, *The Corporate Ideal in the Liberal State* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1968); Richard Radosh and Murray N. Rothbard, eds., *A New History of Leviathan* (New York: Dutton, 1972).

[^18]: In the Marxist tradition this stage of social development is termed “monopoly capitalism,” “finance capitalism,” or “state monopoly capitalism.”

The descriptive part of Marxist analyses is generally valuable. In unearthing the close personal and financial links between state and business, they usually paint a much more realistic picture of the present economic order than do the mostly starry-eyed “bourgeois economists.” Analytically, however, they get almost everything wrong and turn the truth upside down.

The traditional, correct pre-Marxist view on exploitation was that of radical laissez-faire liberalism as espoused by, for instance, Charles Comte and Charles Dunoyer. According to them, antagonistic interests do not exist between capitalists as owners of factors of production and laborers, but between, on the one hand, the producers in society, i.e., homesteaders, producers and contractors, including businessmen as *well* as workers, and on the other hand, those who acquire wealth nonproductively and/or noncontractually, i.e., the state and stateprivileged groups, such as feudal landlords. This distinction was first confused by Saint-Simon, who had at some time been influenced by Comte and Dunoyer, and who classified market businessmen along with feudal lords and other stateprivileged groups as exploiters. Marx took up this confusion from Saint-Simon and compounded it by making only capitalists exploiters and all workers exploited, justifying this view through a Ricardian labor theory of value and his theory of surplus value. Essentially, this view on exploitation has remained typical for Marxism to this day despite Böhm-Bawerk’s smashing refutation of Marx’s exploitation theory and his explanation of the difference between factor prices and output prices through time preference (interest). To this day, whenever Marxist theorists talk about the exploitative character of monopoly capitalism, they see the root cause of this in the continued existence of the private ownership of means of production. Even if they admit a certain degree of independence of the state apparatus from the class of monopoly capitalists (as in the version of “state monopoly capitalism”), for them it is not the state that makes capitalist exploitation possible; rather it is the fact that the state is an agency of capitalism, an organization that transforms the narrow-minded interests of individual capitalists into the interest of an ideal universal capitalist (the *ideelle Gesamtkapitalist*), which explains the existence of exploitation.

In fact, as explained, the truth is precisely the opposite: It is the state that by its very nature is an exploitative organization, and capitalists can engage in exploitation only insofar as they stop being capitalists and instead join forces with the state. Rather than speaking of state monopoly capitalism, then, it would be more appropriate to call the present system “state financed monopoly socialism,” or “bourgeois socialism.”

For representative Marxist studies, see Rudolf Hilferding, *Finance Capital* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981); V.I. Lenin, *Imperialism Last Stage of Capitalism* (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1947); Paul M. Sweezy, *The Theory of Capitalist Development* (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1942); Paul A. Baran and Paul M. Sweezy, *Monopoly Capital* (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1966); Ernest Mandel, *Marxist Economic Theory* (London: Merlin, 1962); *Late Capitalism* (London: New Left Books, 1975); Herbert Meissner, ed., *Bürgerliche Ökonomie ohne Perspektive* (East Berlin: Dietz, 1976); on the perversion of the classical liberal class analysis through Marxism, see Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right” in *Egalitarianism As a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974); on the refutation of the Marxist theory of exploitation, see Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, *Karl Marx and the Close of His System*, ed. Paul M. Sweezy, (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1948).

[^19]: To recognize the far-reaching integration of state interests and those of the economic power elite, which is brought about by the monopolization of money and banking, is not to say that there cannot be conflicts arising within this coalition. As mentioned earlier, the state is also characterized, for instance, by the necessity of democratizing its constitution. And the democratic process could well bring egalitarian or populist sentiments to the surface which were opposed to the state’s favorable treatment of banks and big business. However, it is precisely the financial nature of the state-business connection that makes such an occurrence unlikely. For not only would this pose an immediate threat to the economic power elite; it would also imply severe financial losses in state income, even if it did not threaten the stability of the state as such. Hence a powerful incentive exists for both sides to join forces in filtering any such sentiment out of the political process before it ever becomes widely heard and to ensure with all resources at their command that the range of political alternatives admitted to public discussion is so restricted as to systematically exclude any scrutinizing of their joint counterfeiting racket.

See on this also such—in spite of their characteristic leftist misconceptions—informative studies as C. Wright Mills, *The Power Elite* (New York: 1965); G. William Domhoff, *Who Rules America?* (New York: 1967); E.E. Schattschneider, *The Semi-Sovereign People* (New York: Holt 1960); Peter Bachrach and Morton Baratz, *Power and Poverty* (New York: 1970); C. Offe, *Strukturprobleme des Kapitalistischen Staates* (Frankfurt/M. Suhrkamp, 1972).