### The Consequence of Moral Error: Statism and the Destruction of Liberty and Property

All errors are costly. This is most obvious with errors concerning laws of nature. If a person errs regarding laws of nature this person will not be able to reach his own goals. However, because the failure of doing so must be borne by each erring individual, there prevails in this realm a universal desire to learn and correct one’s errors. Moral errors are costly, too. Unlike in the former case, however, their cost must not, at least not necessarily, be paid for by each and every person committing the error. In fact, this would be the case only if the error involved were that of believing that *everyone* had the right to tax and the right of ultimate decision-making regarding the person and property of *everyone* else. A society whose members believed *this* would be doomed. The price to be paid for this error would be universal death and extinction. However, matters are distinctly different if the error involved is one of believing that only *one agency*—*the state*—has the right to tax and the right to ultimate decision-making (rather than *everyone*, or else, and correctly so, no one). A society whose members believed *this*—that is, that there must be different laws applying unequally to masters and serfs, taxers and taxed, legislators and legislatees—*can* in fact exist and endure. This error must be paid for, too. But not everyone holding this erroneous belief pays for it equally. Rather, *some* people will have to pay for it, while others—the agents of the state—actually benefit from the same error. Hence, in this case it would be mistaken to assume a universal desire to learn and correct one’s errors. To the contrary, in this case it must be assumed that rather than learning and promoting the truth, some people have a constant motive to lie, i.e., to maintain and promote falsehoods even if they themselves recognize them as such.

In any case, what are the “mixed” consequences of, and what is the unequal price to be paid for, the error and/or lie of believing in the justice of the institution of a state?

Once the principle of government—judicial monopoly and the power to tax—is incorrectly admitted as just, any notion of restraining government power and safeguarding individual liberty and property is illusory. Instead, under monopolistic auspices the price of justice and protection will continually rise and the quality of justice and protection fall. A tax-funded protection agency is a contradiction in terms—an expropriating property protector—and will inevitably lead to more taxes and less protection. Even if, as some classical liberal statists have proposed, a government limited its activities exclusively to the protection of pre-existing private property rights, the further question of *how much* security to produce would arise. Motivated (like everyone) by self-interest and the disutility of labor but endowed with the unique power to tax, a government agent’s response will invariably be the same: To *maximize expenditures on protection*—and almost all of a nation’s wealth can conceivably be consumed by the cost of protection—and at the same time to *minimize the production of protection*. The more money one can spend and the less one must work to produce, the better off one will be.

Moreover, a judicial monopoly will inevitably lead to a steady deterioration in the quality of justice and protection. If no one can appeal to justice except to government, justice will be perverted in favor of the government, constitutions and supreme courts notwithstanding. Constitutions and supreme courts are state constitutions and agencies, and all limitations to state action they might contain or find are invariably decided by agents of the very institution under consideration. Predictably, the definition of property and protection will continually be altered and the range of jurisdiction expanded to the government’s advantage until, ultimately, the notion of universal and immutable human rights—and in particular property rights—will disappear and be replaced by that of law as government-made legislation and rights as government-given grants.

The results, all of which were predicted by Rothbard, are before our eyes, for everyone to see. The tax load imposed on property owners and producers has continually increased, making the economic burden even of slaves and serfs seem moderate in comparison. Government debt—and hence, future tax obligations—has risen to breathtaking heights. Every detail of private life, property, trade, and contract is regulated by ever higher mountains of paper laws. However, the only task that government was ever supposed to assume—of protecting our life and property—it does not perform. To the contrary, the higher the expenditures on social, public, and national security have risen, the more our private property rights have been eroded, the more our property has been expropriated, confiscated, destroyed, and depreciated. The more paper laws have been produced, the more legal uncertainty and moral hazard has been created, and lawlessness has displaced law and order. Instead of protecting us from domestic crime and foreign aggression, our government, equipped with enormous stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction, aggresses against ever new Hitlers and suspected Hitlerite sympathizers anywhere and everywhere outside of its “own” territory. In short, while we have become ever more helpless, impoverished, threatened, and insecure, our state rulers have become increasingly more corrupt, arrogant, and dangerously armed.