İşte bu sebepten ötürü, kamuoyundaki bu yozlaşmış etkiyi onaylayarak, devletler giderek yeniden dağılan politikalarla meşgul oluyorlar. Devlet harcamalarının sivil harcamalara oranı, askeri harcamalar ve saf hükümet tüketimi ile karşılaştırıldığında artmaktadır. Mutlak olarak son harcamalar istikrarla artabilir ve aslına bakarsanız bugüne kadar da her yerde yaptıkları budur.

Bu tür yeniden dağıtım politikaları kamusal görüşün özel koşullarına bağlı olarak, tipik bir şekilde iki formdan birini ve Prusya'da olduğu gibi her ikisini de aynı anda varsaymaktadır: Bir yanda Sozialpolitik adı verilen refah reformları biçimi ki bu, genelde üreticiler arasında "varlardan" dan "yoklar" a doğru bir geliri kapsar ve diğer taraftan işletme kartelleşmelerinin ve yönetmeliklerin yeniden dağılımı, genellikle üretken "yoklardan" ya da "henüz yoklar"dan sabit "zaten varlara" doğru manasına gelmektedir. Bir Sozialpolitik'in getirilmesi ile eşitlikçilik duygularına itiraz yapılır ve bunun önemli bir kısmı, devletin "sosyal adaleti" yerine getirmesi karşılığında devlet sömürüsü kabulüne dönüşebilir. İş dünyasını kartelleştirme ve yönetme politikasının yürürlüğe konmasıyla birlikte, özellikle burjuva kuruluşları arasındaki muhafazakar duygulara itiraz eder ve bir statükonun korunmasına olan bağlılığın karşılığında, devletin taşeronlaşmamış ödeneklerini kabul etmeye getirilebilir. Böylece eşitlikçi sosyalizm ve muhafazakarlık, devletçi ideolojilere dönüşür. Bir miktar farklı yeniden dağılım modellerini savunuyor olmaları açısından birbirleriyle rekabet ediyorlar; fakat rekabetçi çabaları, devletçiliğin ve devletçilerin yeniden dağıtılması için ortak bir destekte birleşiyor ve entegre oluyorlar.

Özel mülkiyet ahlakının geri kazanılmasına yardımcı olan ikinci yapısal uyum, eyaletlerin anayasalarında bir değişikliktir. Özel mülkiyet etiğinin meydan okumasına cevaben devletler, anayasalarını monarşik bir otokrasi ya da aristokrat bir oligarşiden, şu anda bilindik liberal demokrasi türü haline getirmektedirler.[^42] Kast sistemi ya da sınıf mevzuatları yoluyla kendisine ve/veya belli kamu görevlerine girmeyi kısıtlayan bir kurum olmak yerine, prensipte her hükümet devlet politikası oluşturulmasında, konumunu herkese açan, katılım ve rekabette eşit ve evrensel haklar veren bir devlet anayasası kabul etmiştir. Herkes—sadece "soylular sınıfı" değil—artık devlette yasal bir bir menfaat bulmaktadır ve bunun kuralına direnmek azalma eğilimindedir. İstismar ve kamulaştırma kötü gibi görünse de, çok daha az görünüyor, insan oğlu böyledir, ve böylece bir kişiye sürece katılma şansı veriliyor. Ve kamudaki potansiyel güç sahiplerinin hayal kırıklığına uğramasıyla birlikte, şimdi onlar için kurumsallaşmış bir çıkış bulunmakta.

Devlet, anayasasını demokratikleştirmenin bedelini öderken kamuoyunun önemli bir bölümünü, bir sömürü hareketinin temel gerçeğini görmezden gelmek amacıyla bozuyor ve kamulaştırma ne olursa olsun her şekilde ve sonuçta aynı kalarak uygulanıyor. Bu durum onları devletin bir yerinde bir çizgide buluşturmayı garantileyip devlet görevlilerinin seçiminde yer ayarladığı sürece, onları bu tür eylemlerin meşru olduğu görüşünü kabullenmeye iter.[^43]

Demokratikleşmenin bu yozlaşan işlevi, devlet iktidarının yeniden dirilmesi için bir teşvik unsuru olarak Bertrand de Jouvenel tarafından harika bir perspektif ile tanımlanmıştır:

> On ikinci yüzyıldan on sekizinci yüzyıla kadar, hükümet otoritesi sürekli büyüdü. Bu süreç, olaya şahit olan herkes tarafından anlaşıldı ve onları sürekli bir protestoya ve şiddet içeren bir tepkiye doğru sürükledi. In later times its growth has continued at an accelerated pace, and its extension has brought a corresponding extension of war. Ve şimdi biz artık süreci anlamıyoruz ,artık biz karşı çıkmıyoruz , artık biz tepki göstermiyoruz. The quiescence of ours is a new thing, for which Power has to thank the smoke-screen in which it has wrapped itself. Formerly it could be seen, manifest in the person of the king, who did not disclaim being the master he was, and in whom human passions were discernible. Now, masked in anonymity, it claims to have no existence of its own, and to be but the impersonal and passionless instrument of the general will. But that is clearly a fiction…. Today as always Power is in the hands of a group of men who control the power house…. All that has changed is that it has now been made easy for the ruled to change the personnel of the leading wielders of Power. Viewed from one angle, this weakens Power, because the wills that control a society’s life can, at the society’s pleasure, be replaced by other wills, in which it feels more confidence. But, by opening the prospect of Power to all the ambitious talents, this arrangement makes the extension of Power much easier. Under the *ancien régime*, society’s moving spirits, who had, as they knew, no chance of a share of Power, were quick to denounce its smallest encroachment. Now, on the other hand, when everyone is potentially a minister, no one is concerned to cut down an office to which he aspires one day himself, or to put sand in a machine which he means to use himself when his turn comes. Dolayısıyla, modern bir toplumun siyasi çevrelerinde, İktidarın genişlemesinde geniş bir suç ortaklığı vardır.[^44]

Devletin en düşük popülerlik derecesinin üstesinden gelmek ve bugünkü boyutuna yükselmesi için devlet tarafından yapılan diğer iki düzenleme, eyaletler arası ilişkilerle ilgilidir. Birincisi, daha önce de açıklandığı ve Jouvenel tarafından tekrar belirtildiği gibi, devletler tekelci sömürücüler eyaletler arası savaşa katılma eğilimindedirler. Dahili sömürücü güçleri zayıf olduğunda, bu kayıpları dış genişleme ile telafi etme arzusu yükselir. Fakat bu arzular iç desteğin olmaması sebebiyle hayal kırıklığına uğradı. Bu destek, yeniden dağıtım, endüstriyel düzenleme ve demokratikleşme politikasıyla oluşturuldu. (İşin aslına bakarsanız, bu tedbirleri kabul etmeyen devletler uzun süren herhangi bir savaşta kaybedeceklerdir!) Devletin yayılmacı isteklerini gerçekleştirmek için bir sıçrama tahtası olarak kullanılan şey işte bu destektir.

Bu yeni kazanılan destek, yeniden dağıtılmanın, düzenlemenin ve demokratikleşmenin, nüfusun kendine has bir devletle daha somut bir biçimde tanımlanmasını destekler ve böylece yabancılara karşı düşmanca tavırlar açık değilse, korumacılığın artışında otomatik olarak başı çeker ve özellikle devlet ayrıcalıklı üreticiler tabiat itibariyle "yabancı" rekabet karşısında düşman olurlar. This support is transformed by the state and its intellectual bodyguards into a frenzy of nationalism and provides the intellectual framework for the integration of socialist-egalitarian, conservative, and democratic sentiments.[^45]

Bu ulusalcılıkla desteklenen devletler yayılmacılığa başlarlar. For more than a century an almost uninterrupted series of wars and imperialist expeditions set in, each one more brutal and destructive than the previous one, with always greater involvement of the noncombative population, culminating in World War I and II but not ending with this. In the name of the socialist, conservative, or democratic nation, and by means of warfare, states have expanded their territories to sizes compared to which even the Roman Empire appears insignificant, and have actually wiped out or brought under foreign rule a steadily increasing number of culturally distinct nations.[^46]

Ancak, yalnızca devlet gücünün dışa açılmasının yanı sıra, ulusalcılık ideolojisi de getirilmemiştir. Milliyetçiliğin doğal sonucu olaran savaş, devletin iç sömürü ve kamulaştırma güçlerini arttırmak için kullanılan araçtır. Each war is also an internal emergency situation, and an emergency requires and seems to justify the acceptance of the state’s increasing its control over its own population. Such increased control gained through the creation of emergencies is reduced during peacetime, but it never sinks back to its pre-war levels. Rather, each successfully ended war (and only successful governments can survive) is used by the government and its intellectuals to propagate the idea that it was only because of nationalistic vigilance and expanded governmental powers that the “foreign aggressors” were crushed and one’s own country saved, and that this successful recipe must then be retained in order to be prepared for the next emergency. Led by the just proven “dominant” nationalism, each successful war ends with the attainment of a new peacetime high of governmental controls and thereby further strengthens a government’s appetite for implementing the next winnable international emergency.[^47]

Each new period of peace means a higher level of governmental interference as compared with the previous one: internally in the form of increased restrictions on the range of choices that private property owners are allowed to make regarding their own property; and externally, as regards foreign relations, in the form of higher trade barriers and of increasingly severe restrictions on population movements (most notably on emigration and immigration). Not the least because it is based on increased discrimination against foreigners and foreign trade, any such peace contains the increased risk of the next international conflict, or pressures the affected governments into negotiating bi- or multilateral interstate-agreements aimed at cartelizing their respective power structures and thereby jointly exploiting and expropriating each other’s populations.[^48]

Finally, the fourth adjustment is made necessary by the other three, and again because of the ongoing process of interstate competition, crises, and warfare. It is less of the state’s own making than are redistribution, democratization, and war-making—just as it is not of its own making that there *is* interstate-competition at all. Rather, in fashionable Hayekian terminology, it is the unintended consequence of the fact that short of one state’s domination of the entire world (which is, of course, every state’s dream!) the continued existence of other states keeps exerting a significant constraint on each state’s size and structure.

İster planlı ister plansız olsun, bu yapısal uyum, günümüz statism dünyasına götüren gelişmeyi tam olarak anlamak istiyorsa not edilmelidir. It is also only by mentioning this adjustment that the question why it is specifically the *tax*-state that has risen to world dominance is finally answered.

It is easy enough to explain how through a series of nationalistic wars during the nineteenth and twentieth century the states of Western Europe and North America could come to dominate the rest of the world and leave their imprint upon it. Notwithstanding the presently booming cultural relativism, the reason for this is the simple fact that these states were the outgrowth of societies with a superior intellectual tradition—that of Western rationalism—with its central ideas of individual freedom and private property, and that this tradition had laid the foundation for the creation of economic wealth far exceeding that existing anywhere else. Because they parasitically drew on such superior economic wealth, it is not at all surprising that these states were then able to battle all others victoriously.

It is also obvious why with the remarkable exception of a number of Pacific countries most of these defeated and reconstituted non-Western states have to this day utterly failed to significantly improve their international stature or even match that of the Western nation states, and have in particular failed to do so after having reached political independence from Western imperialism. With no endogenous tradition of rationalism and liberalism to speak of, such states naturally felt inclined to imitate or adopt the “victorious” ideological imports of socialism, conservatism, democratism, and nationalism, the very ideologies to which these countries’ intellectual elite had been exposed almost exclusively during their studies at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, London, Paris, Berlin, Harvard, and Columbia. As a matter of course, a brew of such each-and-all statist ideologies, unconstrained by a significant tradition of private property ethic, spells economic disaster, and such a fact more or less rules out any prominent role in international politics.[^49]

Fakat—ve bunun biraz daha az anlaşılır olduğunu gösterir—eğer Batılı devletler birbiri ile savaşırlarsa? Bu çatışmalarda başarıyı ne belirler, ve yenilgiye uğramanın sebebi nedir?

Naturally, redistribution, democratization, and nationalism cannot be cited again here, for assumedly these states have already adopted such policies in order to regain internal strength and prepare for interstate warfare in the first place. Rather, just as it is the relatively stronger tradition of private property ethic that is responsible for these states’ dominance over the non-Western world, so, *ceteris paribus*, is a relatively more liberal policy responsible for their long run success in the struggle for survival among the Western states themselves. Among them, those states which have adjusted their internal redistributionist policies so as to decrease the importance of a conservatively minded policy of economic regulations relative to that of socialistically inclined policy of taxation tend to outstrip their competitors in the arena of international politics.

Regulations through which states either compel or prohibit certain exchanges between two or more private persons as well as acts of taxation are invasions of private property rights. In pursuing both types of redistributionist policies, the states’ representatives increase their own income at the expense of a corresponding income reduction for someone else. However, while by no means less destructive of productive output than taxation, regulations have the peculiar characteristic of requiring the state’s control over economic resources in order to become enforceable without simultaneously increasing the resources at its disposal. In practice, this is to say that regulations require the state’s command over and expenditure of taxes, yet regulations produce no monetary income for the state but only income in the form of the satisfaction of pure power lust (as when A, for no material gains of his own, outlaws that B and C engage in mutually beneficial trade with each other). On the other hand, taxation and a redistribution of tax revenue according to the principle “from Peter to Paul” increases the economic means at a government’s disposal at least by its own “handling-charge” for the act of redistribution but may produce no other satisfaction (apart from the increased appreciation by the Pauls) than that of actually possessing certain economic resources and being able to expend them according to its own whims.[^50]

Clearly, interstate conflicts and war require economic means, and even more resources the more frequent and longer-lasting such events are. In fact, those states which control more ample economic resources expendable on a war-effort will *ceteris paribus* tend to be victorious. Hence, since a policy of taxation, and taxation without regulation, yields a higher monetary return to the state than a policy of regulation, and of taxation cum regulation, states must willy-nilly move in the direction of a comparatively deregulated economy and a comparatively pure tax-state in order to avoid international defeat.

It is this relative advantage in international politics of the tax-state over the regulatory state that explains the rise of the U.S. to the rank of the world’s foremost imperial power.[^51] It also explains the defeat of such highly regulatory states as Nazi-Germany and Fascist-Italy, the relative weakness of the Soviet Union and its allies as compared to the NATO-alliance, and the recent simultaneous moves toward economic deregulation and increased levels of imperialist aggression of the Reagan and, to a lesser extent, the Thatcher governments.

This concludes my praxeologically informed sociological account of the evolution of the present statist world and the rise, in particular, of the modern tax-state. Based on such an understanding let me end with just a few brief remarks of how it is possible to overcome the tax-state.

It cannot be fought by a simple boycott, as could a private business, because an institution devoted to the business of expropriating and exploiting does not respect the negative verdict revealed by boycotts. It also cannot simply be fought by countering its aggression with defensive violence because the state’s aggression is supported by public opinion. Thus, overcoming it depends on a change in public opinion. The private property ethic—the idea that private property is a just institution and the only means of creating economic prosperity, and the view of the state as an outcast institution that is destructive of wealth formation, must be revived and must again inspire people’s minds and hearts. With the rampant statist ideologies of nationalism, democratism, and redistributionism (of either the socialist or the conservative kind), this may sometimes appear hopeless. However, ideas have changed in the past and can change again in the future. In fact, ideas can change instantaneously.[^52] Moreover, the idea of private property has one decisive attraction: it, and only it, is a true reflection of man’s nature as a rational being.[^53]

[^41]: On this trend see Webber and Wildavsky, *A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World*, pp. 588f.; on redistribution in general see also de Jasay, *The State*, chap. 4.

[^42]: On this trend see Reinhard Bendix, *Kings or People* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978).

[^43]: On the social psychology of democracy see Gaetano Mosca, *The Ruling Class* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1939); H.L. Mencken, *Notes on Democracy* (New York: Knopf, 1926); on the tendency of democratic rule to “degenerate” to oligarchic rule see Robert Michels, *Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens* (Stuttgart: Kroener, 1957).

[^44]: Bertrand de Jouvenel, *On Power* (New York: Viking Press, 1949), pp. 9–10.

[^45]: On nationalism, imperialism, colonialism—and their incompatibility with classical liberalism—see Ludwig von Mises, *Liberalism* (San Francisco: Cobden Press, 1985); idem, *Nation, State and Economy* (New York: New York University Press, l983); Joseph A. Schumpeter, *Imperialism and Social Classes* (New York: World Publishing, 1955); Lance E. Davis and Robert A. Huttenback, *Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: The Political Economy of British Imperialism 1860–1912* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).

[^46]: See Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*; Johnson, *Modern Times*.

[^47]: This process is the central topic of Higgs, *Crisis and Leviathan*.

[^48]: The most vicious of such agreements is very likely that of restricting entry for noncriminal persons wanting to immigrate into a given territory—and the chance for those living in this territory to offer employment to them—and of extraditing them back to their home-countries.

[^49]: On the problem of the so-called Third World see Peter T. Bauer and B.S. Yamey, *The Economics of Under-Developed Countries* (London: Nisbet and Co., 1957); P.T. Bauer, *Dissent on Development* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972); idem, *Equality, The Third World and Economic Delusion* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981); Stanislav Andreski, *The African Predicament* (New York: Atherton Press, 1969); idem, *Parasitism and Subversion* (New York: Pantheon, 1966).

[^50]: On regulation and taxation as different forms of aggression against private property and their economics and sociology see Rothbard, *Power and Market*; Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*.

[^51]: On the imperialistic foreign policy of, in particular, the U.S. see Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*, chap. III, p. 1; and Rothbard, *For a New Liberty*, chap. 14.

[^52]: See on this also Etienne de la Boétie, *The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude*, ed. Murray N. Rothbard (New York: Free Life Editions, 1975).

> Resolve to serve no more, and you are at once freed. I do not ask that you place bands upon the tyrant to topple him over, but simply that you support him no longer; then you will behold him, like a great colossus whose pedestals have been pulled away, fall of his own weight and break into pieces. (pp. 52–53)

[^53]: On the—a prioristic—rational justification of the private property ethic see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “From the Economics of Laissez Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); idem, “The Justice of Economic Efficiency,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter, 1988); infra chaps. 8 and 9.