Bu sonuçların geçerliliğini göstermek, para varlıklarını vergi iadesi konusunda çok tanıdık bir davayı göz önüne alırsak zor değildir. Bu tür varlıklar ancak gelecekteki tarihlerde diğer değerli varlıkları satın alabildikleri için edinilir ve tutulur. Hiçbir kendi içsel kullanımları-değeri yoktur (bir fiat kağıt para durumunda olduğu gibi), veya böyle bir kullanım değeri, değişim değeri ile kıyaslandığında önemsizdir(paranın aynı zamanda küçük emtia değerine sahip olduğu altın standartta olduğu gibi). Aksine, onlara bağlı değer, gelecekteki satın alma gücünden kaynaklanmaktadır. Bununla birlikte, paranın değeri, gelecekteki mevcut varlıkları temsil etmekten oluşuyorsa, vergilendiren paranın etkileri derhal netleşecektir. En önemlisi, boş zamanın veya tüketimin marjinal faydasını arttırmakla birlikte, böyle bir vergi, bu gibi gelecekteki varlıkların marjinal faydasını artırır. This change in the constellation of incentives translates itself for an actor into increased attempts to obtain these assets more quickly, in less time-consuming production processes. Artık üretim kaynaklı süreçler, dolaylı olarak gelecekteki varlıklara ulaşmaktan sistematik olarak daha kısa olan, daha önce para edinimi yoluyla, doğrudan borsalar yoluyla edinilen üretim süreçleridir. Dolayısıyla vergilendirme, takas ticaretinin giderek daha uzun süreli dolaşım para değişim yöntemleri ile değiştirileceğini ima eder. Fakat yine de, takas çağrısı, ekonomik ilkelcilik ve barbarlık için bir gerileme. Tam tersine, takas amaçları için üretim, insanlığın bu gelişim aşamasını gerçekten geride bıraktığı ve bunun yerine gittikçe artan bir şekilde üretim üretim sistemini genişlettiği aşırı düşük bir çıktı ürettiği için, daha uzun bir bekleme süresi gerektirirken, nakit bağlantısına çekilen daha fazla ve farklı varlıkların çok daha büyük bir dönüşünü sağlar. Vergilendirmenin her hareketi, bu süreçte geriye doğru geriye doğru adım atılması anlamına gelir. Çıktıyı düşürür, işbölümünün boyutunu azaltır ve sosyal ve ekonomik entegrasyonda azalmaya yol açar.(ki, dolaylı para değişim kurumları için değil de olsa, dünya çapında hiçbir zaman olamazdı).

Furthermore, the general tendency towards increasingly adopting direct instead of indirect exchange mechanisms caused by every coercive seizure of money also has highly important consequences with regard to the methods of attaining money itself. Parasal olmayan varlıklar durumunda olduğu gibi, boş zaman tüketimiyle birlikte marjinal paranın artması da, daha az zaman harcayan yollarla para kazanmak için nispeten daha çekici olmaktadır. Instead of acquiring it in return for value-productive efforts, i.e., within the framework of mutually beneficial exchanges, taxation raises the incentive to acquire it more quickly and directly, without having to go through such tediously roundabout methods as producing and contracting. Bir yandan, bu, bir kişinin para varlıklarını vergi toplayıcısından gizleyerek artırmak için daha sık deneyeceği anlamına gelir. On the other hand, a growing tendency will emerge to come into the possession of money through coercive seizure—either in the illegal form called stealing, or legally, by participating in the game called politics.[^9]

Vergilere ilişkin genel ekonomik analizi tamamladıktan sonra, günümüzün ekonomik ders kitap yazarları genelde hiç uğraşamayacaklarını tercih ediyorlar, şimdi vergilendirme başlığı altındaki vergilerin etkileri hakkında genelde söylediklerine bakalım. Önceki analizimiz ışığında, bu tür hesaplarda ölümcül kusur tespit etmek kolay olacak. Aslında, kimse, temel bilgiler üzerinde çalışmaktan rahatsız olmazsa, ayrıntılarla uğraşırken hata yapmaya başlamalıdır.

Vergi insidansının sorununun standart hesabı, bir tüccar veya satış vergisi örneğinde olduğu gibi en sık rastlanan örnek: <sup id="fnref:10"><a href="#fn:10" class="footnote-ref"> 2 </ 0> Bir vergi veya satış vergisi getirildiğini varsayalım. Bunun yükünü kim çekmeli? It is recognized—and I have of course no intention of disputing the validity of this—that in one sense there can be no question that consumers must take the brunt, and invariably do. Böyle bir vergi ne spesifik sonuçları olursa olsun, ya tüketicilerin aynı mallar için daha yüksek bir fiyat ödemeleri gerekecek ve bu sebeple yaşam standartları bozulacaktır, ya da verginin üretici tarafından daha yüksek maliyetler getirmesi gerektiği ve tüketicilerin üretilen daha düşük bir üretim yüzünden cezalandırılacağı bir durum olmalıdır. Bununla birlikte keskin bir şekilde katılmamanız gerekecek, daha sonra, bir verginin uygulanmasının, tüketicilere önceki veya son olarak zarar verip anlamadığının açık ampirik bir soru olduğu savunulmaktadır, bunun cevabı vergilendirilmiş ürünlere olan talebin esnekliğine bağlı. If the demand is sufficiently inelastic, then producers will shift the entire burden onto consumers in the form of higher prices. If it is highly elastic, then producers will have to absorb the tax in the form of higher costs of production, and if some section of the demand curve is inelastic and another elastic (this allegedly being empirically the most frequent case), then the burden somehow will have to be shared, with part of it being shifted onto consumers and another falling on producers.</p> 

<p>
  What is wrong with this sort of argument? While it is couched in terms different from those used in my earlier analysis, one can hardly fail to notice that it merely restates, on a somewhat more specific level of discussion, what has already been demonstrated as false on a more general level: the thesis that taxes may or may not reduce productive output; that there is no necessary connection between taxes and productive output; and that it must be considered empirically possible that a tax may affect consumption exclusively while production remains untouched. To assume, as the textbook-account of taxincidence does, that taxes can be shifted forward, either totally or partially, onto consumers is simply to say that a tax may not negatively affect production. For if it were possible to shift any amount of a tax forward onto consumers, that amount would represent a “nonproduction tax,” a tax exclusively on consumption.<fnref target="11" />
</p>

<p>
  In order to refute the typical textbook analysis, one could simply go back to our previous discussion that resulted in the conclusion that any tax imposed on people constrained by time preference must negatively affect production above and beyond any negative consequences that it implies for consumption. However, I will choose a somewhat different route of argument here in order to make essentially the same point and thereby establish the more specific thesis that no amount of any tax can be shifted onto consumers. To assume otherwise is to assume something manifestly impossible.
</p>

<p>
  The absurdity of the tax-forward-shifting doctrine becomes clear as soon as one tries to apply it to the case of a single actor who continuously acts in both roles—that of a producer and a consumer. For such a producer-consumer, the doctrine amounts to this proposition: If he is faced with an increase in the costs of attaining some future good—an increase, that is, that he himself perceives as a cost-increasing event—then he shifts these higher costs onto himself in such a way that he responds by attaching a correspondingly higher value to the good to be obtained, thereby restoring his old profit-margin, thus leaving his role as producer unchanged and unimpaired, and requiring restrictive adjustments exclusively in his role as a consumer. Or, formulated even more drastically, insofar as his value-productive efforts are concerned, a tax does not make any difference for an individual, because he just starts liking the to-be-produced good correspondingly more.
</p>

<p>
  Plain reasoning reveals that what generates such absurdity is a fundamental conceptual confusion: The forward-shifting doctrine arises from not recognizing that in one’s analysis one must assume that demand is given—and that this must be assumed because it in fact is given at any point in time. Any analysis that loses track of this is flawed, for if one were to assume that demand had changed, then everything would be possible: production might increase, decrease, or remain unchanged. If I am a producer of tea and tea is taxed and if it is assumed that the demand schedule for tea rises concurrently, then, naturally, it is possible that people are now willing to pay a higher price for tea than previously. Yet this is obviously not a forward shifting of the tax but the result of a change in demand. To present this possibility under the heading of tax-incidence analysis is plain nonsense: it is in fact an analysis of the entirely different question of how prices are affected by changes in demand and has nothing whatsoever to do with the effects of taxation. The confusion here is on as grand a scale as that which one would encounter if someone were to “refute” the statement that one apple and another make two by saying “No, I have just added another apple, and look, there are not two but three apples here.” It is hard to get away with such nonsense in math; in economics a doctrine hardly less absurd is the orthodoxy.
</p>

<p>
  Yet if one is logically committed to assuming demand to be given whenever one tries to answer the question whether or not a tax can be shifted forward, every tax must be interpreted as an event that exclusively affects the supply side: it reduces the supplies at the disposal of suppliers.<fnref target="12" /> Any other conclusion would amount to a denial of what had been assumed from the outset—that a tax had indeed been imposed and perceived as such by producers. To say that only the supply curve is shifted whenever a tax is extracted (while the demand curve remains the same as before) is to say nothing else than that the entire tax-burden must in fact be absorbed by the suppliers. To be sure, the leftward shift of the supply curve would cause prices to rise and consumers would naturally be harmed by having to pay these higher prices and by only being able to afford a smaller amount of goods at such a price.<fnref target="13" /> Yet that consumers will invariably be hurt by taxes has of course never been doubted as one should recall. However, it is a misconception to think that this higher price is a shifting of the tax burden from producers to consumers. Rather, consumers are hurt here “only” by harm being done to producers who, despite higher prices charged for their supplies, must bear the brunt.<fnref target="14" /> One must ask oneself why, if an entrepreneur could indeed shift any amount of the tax-burden away from himself and onto consumers, he would not have already done so by voluntarily imposing a tax on himself instead of waiting for the actual coercive tax to come along! The answer is clear: At all times he is constrained in his price-setting activity by the actual given demand. The price set by any entrepreneur is set with the expectation that a price higher than the one actually chosen would yield a lower total revenue. Otherwise, if he expected a higher price to bring about a larger revenue he would raise it. As long as an entrepreneur expects the demand to be inelastic within the region of any price-range under consideration, he will take advantage of this and choose the higher price. He stops raising prices and settles for a specific one because his expectations are reversed and he anticipates the demand curve above this price to be elastic. These expectations regarding inelastic and elastic portions of the demand curve are not at all changed if the entrepreneur is faced with a tax. Then as now he expects higher prices to produce revenue losses. Thus, it is obviously out of the question to argue that he could escape the burden of the tax. In fact, if as a consequence of the reduced supply the price now rises, this upward movement must be into an elastic portion of the demand curve, and the entrepreneur thus must assumedly pay the full price of it in the form of reduced revenue. Any other conclusion is logically flawed. Only if the entrepreneur expects a change in demand occurring simultaneously with taxation could he change his price without thereby incurring losses. If he expects demand to have increased, for instance, such that there will now be an inelastic rather than an elastic stretch of the demand curve above the presently going price, he will be able to raise it without punishment. Again, this is not a forward shifting of the tax. This is increased demand. With or without the tax the entrepreneur would have acted in precisely the same way. The tax has nothing to do with such price changes. In any case, the tax must be paid exclusively and in full by the suppliers of the taxed goods.<fnref target="15" />
</p>

<footnotes>
  <fn name="9">
    <p>
      Here once again what has already been explained in a somewhat different connection in note 7 above becomes evident: why it is a fundamental mistake to think that taxation might have a “neutral” effect on production such that any “negative” effects on tax<em>payers</em> may be compensated by corresponding “positive” effects on tax <em>spenders</em>. What is overlooked in this sort of reasoning is that the introduction of taxation not only implies favoring nonproducers at the expense of producers. It simultaneously changes, for producers and nonproducers alike, the cost attached to different methods of attaining an income, for it is then relatively less costly to attain an additional income through nonproductive means, i.e., not through actually producing more goods but by participating in the process of noncontractual acquisitions of already produced goods. If such a different incentive structure is applied to a given population, then the length of the production structure will necessarily be shortened, and a decrease in the output of goods produced must result. See on this also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, <em>A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism</em> (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989), chap. 4.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="10">
    <p>
      See for instance William Baumol and Alan Blinder, <em>Economics: Principles and Policy</em> (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979), pp. 636ff.; Daniel R. Fusfeld, <em>Economics: Principles of Political Economy,</em> 3rd ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1987), pp. 639ff.; Robert Ekelund and Robert Tollison, <em>Microeconomics</em>, 2nd ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1988), pp. 463ff. and 469f.; Stanley Fisher, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Richard Schmalensee, <em>Microeconomics</em>, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1988), pp. 385f.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="11">
    <p>
      On the impossibility of a pure consumption tax see also Rothbard, <em>Power and Market</em>, pp. 108ff.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="12">
    <p>
      Baumol and Blinder, <em>Economics: Principles and Policy</em>, p. 636, present the <em>demand</em> curve as changing in response to a tax.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="13">
    <p>
      To avoid any misunderstanding then: Insofar as the textbook analyses of tax-incidence point out this fact they are of course entirely correct. It is the interpretation of this phenomenon they give which is fundamentally confused!
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="14">
    <p>
      See on this point also Rothbard, <em>Man, Economy, and State</em>, p. 809.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="15">
    <p>
      Should a tax not immediately affect supply at all, as can happen in the short run, then it follows from the above analysis that the price charged will not change at all. For to raise it in response to the tax would once again imply pushing it into an elastic region of the demand curve. In the long run the supply will have to be relatively reduced and prices must move into this region. In any case, no forward shifting takes place. See on this also Rothbard, <em>Man, Economy, and State</em>, pp. 807ff.; idem, <em>Power and Market</em>, pp. 88ff.
    </p>
  </fn>
</footnotes>