### The Positive Economics of Fiduciary Media: Money Balance, Price, Adjustment, Saving, and Investment

From the nature of fiduciary media—as titles to nonexisting quantities of money property (gold), titles to money covered by things other than money, or plain counterfeit money—it would seem to follow that fractional reserve banking cannot possibly effect anything but a continual wealth and income redistribution. As the uncovered money substitutes ripple from the issuing bank and its borrower clientele outward through the economy, and thereby successively raise the price of increasingly more goods, real wealth (property) is transferred and redistributed in favor of the issuing bank and the initial and early recipients and sellers of this money, and at the expense of its late or never receivers and sellers. Rothbard Açıklıyor,

> orta noktaya ulaşılana kadar yeni paranın ilk alıcıları en çok kazananlar, bir sonraki kazanç biraz daha az, vb. ve daha sonra her alıcı yeni parayı beklerken giderek daha fazla kaybediyor. İlk şahısların satış fiyatları yükselirken, alış fiyatları hemen hemen aynı kalıyor; ancak daha sonra, alış fiyatları artarken, satış fiyatları değişmeden kalır.[^28]

Bununla birlikte, Selgin ve White'a göre, mütevelli medyası daha fazlasını başarabilir. Mevcut mülklerin yalnızca yeniden dağıtılması yerine, mütevelli medya sorunu, belirli koşullar altında gerçek servet (mülkiyet) artışına neden olabilir. We have already quoted them stating that “benefits accrue to bank borrowers who enjoy a more ample supply of intermediate credit, and to everyone who works with the economy’s consequently larger stock of capital equipment.” They refrain from putting it this bluntly, yet what they claim is that, under specific circumstances, an increase of titles to an unchanged fund of goods will somehow make this fund grow or prevent it from shrinking.

Böyle bir mucize ne zaman ve nasıl gerçekleştirilebilir? According to Selgin and White, (unanticipated) changes in the demand for money lead to “temporary” or “short-run monetary disequilibrium” involving “serious misallocations of resources”—that is, *unless* such changes are accommodated by fractional reserve banking practices. Yazdıkları:

> Uzun vadede, sembolik fiyatların para miktarı ne olursa olsun, para dengeleri için arz ve talebi eşitlemek için ayarlanır. It does not follow, however, that each and every *change* in the supply of or demand for money will lead *at once* to a new long-run equilibrium, because the required price adjustments take time. Zaman alır, çünkü tüm acenteler para stoku veya para talebindeki değişikliklerin anında ve kusursuz bir şekilde farkında değildirler ve bazı fiyatların ayarlanması pahalı olduğundan bu nedenle "yapışkan" olur. Kısa vadede (deneysel olarak, "birkaç ay düşünün"), para arzı veya talebinde tam olarak beklenenden az değişiklik parasal dengesizliğe neden olabilir…. Bu nedenle, kısmi rezervleri olan serbest bankacılığın çekici bir özelliği, banka tarafından verilen paranın nominal miktarı, paranın hızındaki değişiklikleri dengelemek için ayarlama eğilimindedir.[^29]
> 
> Bankacılık sistemi banka tarafından verilen paranın miktarını arttırmazsa ve fiyat düzeyi derhal düşmüyorsa, fazla bir para talebi ortaya çıkar (aynı zamanda taban para miktarının hemen artmadığını varsayıyoruruz). Gelen fazla mal arzına karşılık ortaya çıkar: satılmamış tüketim malları satıcıların raflarında yığılıyor (bu, tabii ki, son mal fiyatlarının yeterince düşmesine kadar fiyatlara aşağı doğru baskı uyguluyor). Para satın alma gücü dengeye gelene kadar iş durgundur.[^30]

Baştan beri parasal dengesizlik sorunu varlığı merak edilmelidir (çözüm hakkında henüz konuşulmuyor). Sadece verilen alıntı, para için yerine başka herhangi bir mal geçebilir: televizyonlar, çelik, bira ya da simit. Bunlar gibi malların miktarları da (altın miktarı olduğu gibi) sabittir ve televizyon, çelik, bira ya da simit taleplerinde (beklenmeyen) ciddi değişiklikler yapılmasına neden olan geçici olmayan bir dengesizliğe yol açmaz. Ya da, her durumda, özel yeni bir cihazın (kısmi televizyon veya bira üretimi gibi) keşfedilmesini gerektiren sorunlara neden olmazlar.

Nor is it clear why we are supposed to believe that “it is important to distinguish between short-run and long-run implications of changes in the demand schedule for money or in the stock of money,”[^31] or, in any case, why this distinction should be of different importance or significance in the case of money from that of everything else. Örneğin, televizyon ve bira talebinde beklenmedik bir artışın göreceli fiyatların sistem üzerindeki tüm etkilerini tüketmesi ve yeni bir düzeltilmiş üretim yapısının kurulması için zaman gerekiyor. Fakat bu, fiyat ayarlamaları herhangi bir zaman alması anlamına gelmez (bu arada kısa vadede sorunlara neden olur). Aksine, fiyat ayarlamaları derhal ve herhangi bir gecikme olmadan gerçekleşir. Arz ve talepteki her değişiklik fiyatları anında etkiler. This fact is overlooked because of an un-Austrian concern for macroeconomic artifacts such as the general price level, long-run equilibrium, and the velocity of money. Ancak, uygun bireyci perspektiften bakıldığında, fiyat ayarlamalarının kısa ve uzun vadedeki praksolojik bütünleşmenin yakınlığı hakkında şüphe yoktur.

Bireysel anlamda, artan bir para talebi bireylerin maksatlı eylemlerinin sonucudur; yani, insanlar kendi bireysel nakit değerlerini artırmaya niyetli. Bunu yapmak için, bir kişi alımlarını kısıtlamalı ve/veya satışlarını artırmalıdır. Her iki durumda da, bazı fiyatlar derhal düşer. Kişinin x, y veya z alımlarını kısıtlamasının bir sonucu olarak, x, y veya z para fiyatını derhal düşürür (aksi takdirde tam tersi olurdu) ve aynı şekilde, birinin satışını arttırarak a, b, veya c, fiyatları hemen düşecektir. Hiç kimse genel fiyat düzeyi veya paranın genel satın alma gücü konusunda endişelenmiyor. Instead, everyone is always concerned about specific prices and the purchasing power of money regarding specific items (and everyone is interested in his very own and different specific array of prices and purchasing power). In restricting his specific purchases and/or increasing his specific sales, each actor accomplishes exactly and immediately what he wants: certain prices that he deems too high are lowered, the purchasing power of a unit of money increases, the real value of his cash balance rises, and his demand for and supply of money is immediately brought back into equilibrium (and he wishes to hold neither more nor less money than he actually does).[^32]

Para talebinin artması ile gerekli olan prakseolojik yaklaşım olarak anlamsız genel fiyat düzeyinin ayarlanması, bir dizi ani ve maksatlı bireysel nakit dengesi ayarlamalarının toplanmasından başka bir şey değildir. If the increased demand for money is accommodated by the issue of fiduciary media, as Selgin and White advocate this adjustment process will not be facilitated but delayed.[^33] Fiyat ayarlamalarının hızı, verilen para miktarıyla ilgili piyasa katılımcılarının beklentilerine bağlıdır. If it is reasonable to assume that fractional reserve banks will increase their fiduciary issues in response to an unanticipated increase in the demand for money, then the adjustment will take *more* time. Production would adjust and begin *earlier* without the additional influence of inflation.[^34]

Dahası, kısa vadeli parasal dengesizlik sorununun iddia edilen çözümü, talep kavramı (ve arz) ve para talebi, tasarruf ve özellikle yatırım arasındaki ilişki konusunda temel bir karışıklık ortaya koymaktadır. First, an increased demand for money (as for televisions, beer, or pretzels) is not just a wish to have more money (or televisions, beer, etc.), but *effective* demand. Yani, para talebi (başka herhangi bir şey için olduğu gibi) yalnızca, talep sahibi piyasaya arzını arttırmaya ve/veya başka bir talebin azaltılmasına istekli olması durumunda tatmin edilebilir. Aynı şekilde, tedarikçi (satıcı), eşzamanlı olarak başka bir şeyin arzını (veya rezervasyon talebini) düşürürse, para arzını artırabilmektedir. The authors have overlooked Say’s law: all goods (property) are bought with other goods, no one can demand anything without supplying something else, and no one can demand or supply more of anything unless he demands or supplies less of something else. But this is here *not* the case whenever a fiduciary note is supplied and demanded. The increased demand for money is satisfied without the demander demanding, and without the supplier supplying, less of anything else. Through the issue and sale of fiduciary media, wishes are accommodated, not effective demand. Property is appropriated (effectively demanded) without supplying other property in exchange. Hence, this is not a market exchange—which is governed by Say’s law—but an act of undue appropriation. Or would it be an efficient solution to the problem of unanticipated short-run television, beer, or pretzel-shortages if television, beer, and pretzel producers were to accommodate such increased demand “temporarily” by issuing and selling additional titles to televisions, beer, and pretzels but not these goods themselves?

Second, Selgin and White further misconstrue the nature of money and demand for money held in making the extraordinary claim that the issue of fiduciary media “*matched by an increased demand to hold fiduciary media*” is not only not disequilibrating, but will actually afford the economy a “larger stock of capital equipment,” because

> [t]he act of holding fractional-reserve *bank-issued* money not only (like holding base money) defers consumption for a longer or shorter period, but also *temporarily lends funds* to the bank of issue in doing so. The period of the loan is unspecified … but if the bank can estimate with a fair degree of accuracy the lengths of time for which its demand claims will remain in circulation … it can safely make investments of corresponding length.[^35]

Following the lead of Rothbard, Hoppe criticized this essentially Keynesian view concerning the relationship between the demand for money and savings (loanable funds)[^36] by pointing out that

> [n]ot-spending money is to purchase *neither* consumer goods *nor* investment goods…. Bireyler parasal varlıklarını üç yoldan biriyle kullanabilirler. They can spend them on consumer goods; they can spend them on investment; or they can keep them in the form of cash. There are no other alternatives…. The consumption/investment proportion, i.e., the decision of how much … to spend on consumption and how much on investment, is determined by a person’s time preference; i.e., the degree to which he prefers present consumption over future consumption. On the other hand, the source of his demand for cash is the utility attached to money; i.e., the personal satisfaction derived from money in allowing him immediate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates.
> 
> Accordingly, if the demand for money increases while the social stock of money is given, this additional demand can only be satisfied by bidding down the money prices of non money goods. The purchasing power of money will increase, the *real* value of individual cash balances will be raised, and at a higher purchasing power per unit money, the demand for and the supply of money will once again be equilibrated. The relative price of money versus non-money will have changed. But *unless* time preference is assumed to have changed at the same time, *real* consumption and *real* investment will remain the same as before: the additional money demand is satisfied by reducing nominal consumption *and* investment spending in accordance with the same pre-existing consumption/investment proportion, driving the money prices of both consumer as well as producer goods down and leaving real consumption and investment at precisely their old levels.[^37]

Accordingly, Hoppe concluded, it is *never* warranted to accommodate an increased demand for money by issuing fiduciary credit.[^38] In fact, to do so will either—insofar as the accommodating increase of fiduciary media is unanticipated and the market rate of interest falls temporarily below the natural rate of interest—lead to a boom-bust cycle; or else—insofar as the monetary change arising from the banking system is anticipated and the market rate of interest is bid up (in the expectation of higher selling prices) in accordance with the height of the natural rate—it will accomplish no more than a plain wealth and income redistribution among various members of society. It is praxeologically impossible, however, that the issue of fiduciary media can lead to an “enlarged stock of capital equipment.”

[^28]: Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993), p. 851.

[^29]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 100–01.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 105\. As Roger Garrison, another fractional reserve free banker, has put it, “in terms of the equation of exchange [MV=PQ], we can say that free banking adjusts M so as to offset changes in V; but allows changes in Q to be accommodated by changes in P.” Garrison describes the short-run “monetary disequilibrium” in almost identical form:

> An increase in the demand for money puts downward pressure on product and factor prices in general. Eğer para arzında bir tepki yoksa, fiyatlar ve ücretler tam olarak ve anında kendilerini yeni piyasa koşullarına ayarlayamadığından, bunu ekonomik faaliyetteki genel bir düşüş takip edecektir. Genel olarak mal satılmayacak; üretim kesilecek; işçiler işten atılacaktır…. Genel deflasyonist baskılar, çok daha esnek olmayan bir fiyat sistemiyle, fiyatların daha yüksek parasal talebe ayarlandığı dönemde ekonomisini potansiyelinin altına itebilir. Bazı fiyatların ve bazı ücretlerin diğerlerinden daha esnek olması, düzeltme periyodunun göreceli kıtlıklarda herhangi bir değişiklik yansıtmayan göreceli fiyat değişikliklerini içermesi anlamına gelmektedir. These are precisely the kinds of problems … avoided by free banking’s responsiveness to increases in money demand. (“Central Banking, Free Banking, and Financial Crises,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 9, no. 2 [1996]: 117)

[^31]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 100.

[^32]: Mises yazıyor:

> Buyers and sellers on the market never concern themselves with the elements in the equation of exchange, of which two—velocity of circulation and the price level—do not even exist before market parties act and the other two—the quantity of money (in the whole economy) and the sum of transactions—could not possibly be known to the parties in the market. Only the importance which the various actors in the market attach, on the one hand, to the maintenance of a cash balance of a certain magnitude and, on the other hand, to the ownership of the various goods in question determines the formation of the exchange relationship between money and goods. (“The Position of Money Among Economic Goods,” in *Money, Method, and the Market Process*, Richard Ebeling, ed. [Boston: Kluwer, 1990], p. 61)

[^33]: Dahası, bireyci perspektiften bakıldığında, artan para talebi belirli aktörler ve belirli zaman ve mekanlarda gerçekleşir. It is not sufficient for banks to accommodate some abstract higher money demand by more money; rather, but the accommodation would have to occur precisely with the correct people and locations. Durum böyle değilse, bir yerden daha fazla bir çarpıtma söz konusudur. This difficulty was recognized by the early Hayek:

> fiyat oluşumu ve üretim yapısı üzerindeki tüm parasal etkilerin ortadan kaldırılması için, talepteki bu değişikliklere parasal arzın adapte edilmesi yeterli değil, gerçekten ihtiyaç duyanların eline geçtiğini, yani iş örgütündeki değişimin ya da ödeme alışkanlıklarının yer aldığı sistemin bu kısmına gelmesi gerekecekti. (*Fiyatlar ve Üretim* [London: Routledge, 1935], p. 124)

Daha sonra Hayek'le birlikte, bankalar bu görevi gerçekleştirmek için gerekli bilgiye nasıl sahip olabilirler merak ediliyor.

[^34]: As regards the stickiness of prices, and the redistributive consequences of an increased demand for money vis-à-vis an array of prices of varying degrees of stickiness, which Selgin and White as well as Garrison raise as matters of concern, it is of utmost importance to recognize that prices are the outcome of purposive action—and so is their stickiness. Diğer bir deyişle, esneklik veya esnekliğini çeşitli ürün ve hizmetlerin kaza sonucu değil, kasıtlı bir kısmıdır. Contrary to Garrison’s claim, the stickiness of prices does affect and is related to, real relative scarcities. If more sticky prices suffer more, so to speak, so be it; that will teach them to be less sticky in the future—if the owners of the property in question act in a manner compatible with this end.

[^35]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 103\. The error of confusing property and titles lies also at the bottom of Selgin and White’s attempts to separate analytically the demand for outside money from the demand for inside money, as if these were somehow two different kinds of money with two different and independent demands.

[^36]: Selgin aynı şeyi şöyle belirtti:

> Whenever a bank expands its liabilities in the process of making new loans and investments, it is the holders of the liabilities who are the ultimate lenders of credit, and what they lend are the real resources they could acquire if, instead of holding money, they spent it. When the expansion or contraction of bank liabilities proceeds in such a way as to be at all times in agreement with changing demands for inside money, the quantity of real capital funds supplied to borrowers by the banks is equal to the quantity voluntarily offered to the banks by the public. Under these conditions, banks are simply intermediaries of loanable funds. (*The Theory of Free Banking: Money Supply under Competitive Note Issue*, p. 55)

As for John Maynard Keynes (*The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money* [New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1936], p. 82), he had written that the notion that the creation of credit by banking systems allows investment to take place to which “no genuine saving” corresponds; that is, “the idea that saving and investment … can differ from one another, is to be explained, I think, by an optical illusion” (p. 81).

> [T]he savings which result from this decision are just as genuine as any other savings. No one can be compelled to own the additional money corresponding to the new bank-credit, unless he deliberately prefers to hold more money rather than some other form of wealth. (p. 83)

Indeed, Selgin acknowledges that

> many Keynesians might accept the prescription for monetary equilibrium offered [by him]. Likidite tuzağını önemli bir gerçek olasılık olarak görmeyenler muhtemelen bunu tamamen yeterli kabul edeceklerdir. (*The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 59)

Henry Hazlitt bu Keynesian düşünceye şöyle dedi

> [o]n the same reasoning we can create any amount of new “savings” we wish overnight, simply by printing that amount of new paper money, because *somebody* will necessarily hold that new paper money! (*The Failure of the “New Economics”: An Analysis of the Keynesian Fallacies* [Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 1983], p. 227)

[^37]: Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?,” pp. 72–73.

[^38]: See also Hoppe, “The Theory of Employment, Money, Interest, and the Capitalist Process: The Misesian Case against Keynes,” in *The Economics and Ethics of Private Property* (Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer, 1993), and Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993), pp. 167ff., 667ff.; idem, *America’s Great Depression* (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983), pp. 39ff.

As for Selgin and White’s claim of being Misesians, it is worthwhile to quote Mises on

> the role cash holding plays in the process of saving and capital accumulation…. [i]f an individual employs a sum of money not for consumption but for the purchase of factors of production, saving is directly turned into capital accumulation. If the individual saver employs his additional savings for increasing his cash holding because this is in his eyes the most advantageous mode of using them, he brings about a tendency toward a fall in commodity prices and a rise in the monetary unit’s purchasing power. If we assume that the supply of money in the market system does not change, this conduct on the part of the saver will not directly influence the accumulation of capital and its employment for an expansion of production. The effect of our saver’s saving, i.e., the surplus of goods produced over goods consumed, does not disappear on account of his hoarding. The prices of capital goods do not rise to the height they would have attained in the absence of such hoarding. But the fact that more capital goods are available is not affected by the striving of a number of people to increase their cash holdings. If nobody employs the goods—the nonconsumption of which brought about the additional saving—for an expansion of his consumptive spending, they remain as an increment in the amount of capital goods available, whatever their prices may be. The two processes—increased cash holding of some people and increased capital accumulation—take place side by side. A drop in commodity prices, other things being equal, causes a drop in the money equivalent of the various individuals’ capital. But this is not tantamount to a reduction in the supply of capital goods and does not require an adjustment of production activities to an alleged impoverishment. It merely alters the money items to be applied in monetary calculation. (Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 521–22)