Hala dünya düzeninin tam bir yeniden yapılanmasında eksik olan tek önemli unsur: para. Topraklarını askeri olarak genişletmek bir devletin doğal çıkarına bağlıdır; dolayısıyla, bir devletin ilgili konsantrasyonuna doğru bir eğilim beklenmelidir. Aynı zamanda devletin “parasal emperyalizm” (yani, sahtecilik gücünü daha geniş topraklara genişletmek) ile uğraşması da bir ilgidir; dolayısıyla, tek dünya kağıt para birimine yönelik bir eğilim beklenmelidir. Hem ilgi alanları hem de eğilimler birbirini tamamlar. Bir yandan, uluslararası sahtecilik karteli yönünde herhangi bir adım askeri egemenlik ve hiyerarşi kurulması ile tamamlanmamış ise başarısız olmaya bağlıdır. Dış ve iç ekonomik baskılar karteli patlatma eğiliminde olacaktır. Ancak askeri üstünlük ile enflasyon karteli mümkün olur. Öte yandan, askeri hakimiyet bir kez böyle bir karteli mümkün kılan, egemen devlet aslında daha fazla savaş ve fetih olmadan diğer bölgeler üzerindeki sömürücü gücünü genişletebilir. Aslında, kalpazanlığın uluslararası kartelizasyonu baskın devletin daha karmaşık (yani daha az görünür) bir şekilde devam etmesine izin verir, savaşın ve fethin tek başına başaramayacağı anlamına gelir.

İlk aşamada, egemen bir devlet (başka bir deyişle, başka bir askeri darbeyi ezebilecek ve bunu yapabilecek bir devlet, özellikle egemen hükümet tarafından) üstün gücünü uluslararası olarak koordine edilmiş bir enflasyon politikasını uygulamak için kullanacaktır. Kendi Merkez Bankası sahtecilik sürecinde hızını ayarlar ve hakim devletlerin merkez bankaları hakim durumdaki devlet ile birlikte şişirilmesi emredilir. Pratik olarak, devletin kağıt para birimi döviz merkez bankaları için rezerv para birimi olarak dayatılır, ve kendi enflasyon eylemleri için bir temel olarak kullanmak için baskı yapılmaktadır.

Gerçek taleple değil, sadece kamuoyu tarafından kısıtlanan, egemen bir devlet için bu hedefe ulaşmak nispeten kolaydır. Direct territorial conquest and the direct implementation of its own currency in foreign territories can be prohibitive because of the state of national or foreign public opinion. Yet with the power to destroy any specific foreign government—even thought it is not strong enough for a complete take-over—little is required in order for the dominant state to succeed in *monetary* imperialism.

İçten içe, muhtemelen hiçbir direnişle karşılaşmayacaktır. Hükümetin kendisi bu çözümden memnun olacaktır. For once its own currency is employed as a reserve currency by foreign banks on which they then pyramid their various national paper monies, then it becomes possible for it to engage in an almost costless expropriation of foreign property owners and income producers without having to fear contractive consequences. Benzer şekilde, kendi bankacılık ve iş dünyası seçkinleride de böyle bir düzenlemeyi kabul etmeye hazırdır, çünkü dolayısıyla onlar da, yabancı sömürüye güvenle katılabilirler. Özellikle bankalar heveslidirler. Ve halk, büyük bir ölçüde neler olduğunu bilmemekte veya iç sorunlarla karşılaştırıldığında yabancıların sömürülmesini önemsememektedirler.

Dışarıdan bakıldığında, işler biraz daha karmaşıktır. Egemen devlet para rejiminin bir sonucu olarak egemen devletin kaynaklarını kaybeder. Ama iç kontrolünü tamamen kaybetme olasılığıyla karşı karşıya kalmanın yanı sıra, egemen devletin kağıt para yaratımına uygun olarak para birimini şişirerek kendi nüfusunun kendi hileli kamulaştırmalarına da devam etmesine izin veren bir şemaya hükmetmeyi tercih eder. Aslında aynı nedenle banka ve iş elitleri için, kendi devletinin sahte para alıcıları olarak, bu çözümü kabul etmeye hazırdırlar. And the general public in the dominated territories, which through arrangement is subject to a double layer of exploitation of foreign states’ elites on top of a national state and elite, is again largely unaware of all this and fails to identify it as one important cause of its own prolonged economic dependency and relative stagnation vis-à-vis the dominant nation.

Anca ilk adım mükemmel bir çözüm sağlamıyor. The international monetary system is characterized by a dominant paper currency, and a multitude of national paper monies pyramiding on top of it, and freely fluctuating exchange rates between such currencies.

On one hand, this is less than satisfactory for the dominant state, because under these circumstances ample room is left for the possibility of its own currency depreciating against others, and such a development would pose a threat to its own role as a dominant power. Döviz kurları sadece çeşitli merkez bankalarının enflasyonist politikaları tarafından belirlenmemiştir. Ultimately and *ceteris paribus*, they are determined by purchasing power parity.[^30] Ve hakim bir merkez bankası isteyerek hakimleşen Merkez Bankası ile birlikte, diğer faktörler (örneğin vergilendirme ve düzenleme alt düzeyi gibi) olsa bile hala parasını hakim durumdakine kıyasla değerlendirebilir.

On the other hand, the existence of a multitude of currencies freely fluctuating against each other is, as explained earlier, dysfunctional of the very purpose of money. Kısmi takas sistemidir. Bilgi karmaşası yaratır, rasyonel ekonomik hesaplamayı imkansız kılar, dolayısıyla baskın devletin parasiatik olarak dayandığı üretim sistemi içinde verimsizliğe yol açar.

Böylece, egemen konumunu güvence altına almak ve sömürüye tahsis edilen geliri maksimize etmek için, ikinci bir aşamada, egemen bir devlet, doğrudan kendi Merkez Bankası ya da dolaylı olarak Merkez Bankası tarafından yönetilen uluslararası—ve nihayetinde evrensel—para tekeliyle kontrol edilen ve uluslararası veya Dünya Bankası tarafından doğrudan ihraç edilen uluslararası bir para birimi kurmaya çalışacaktır.

Bu hedefe giden yolda bazı engeller var. Ancak, ilk adım başarılı bir şekilde tamamlandıktan sonra, bunların hiçbiri aşılamaz gözükmüyor. Doğal olarak hakim olan devlet bu düzenlemeler uyarınca bazı keyfi güçlerini kaybedecektir. Ancak bu, uluslararası ticarette hesapsal olan karmaşa azalmışsa, kendi ekonomisinin de daha verimli bir şekilde işleyeceği gerçeğiyle telafi edilecektir. Ayrıca, her iki ülkedeki bankacılık ve iş dünyasının seçkin elitleri de bu tür bir para rejiminden yana olacak ve onların kabulünü teşvik etmek için kendi devletlerine ve uluslararası bağlantılarına olan yakın bağlarını kullanacaktır. For, after all, banks and industrial firms are also in the business of making money through production and exchanges. Serbestçe dalgalanma kurları bu ekonomik çıkar peşinde yapay bir engel vardır. Ve onlar daha büyük işletmeler tarafından daha yoğun olarak işlevsiz olarak algılanacak, çünkü bu büyük bir iş, özellikle dış ticaretde daha önemli bir rol oynadığı için.

In fact, the most severe resistance to the adoption of an international currency is to be expected not from the states and the economic elites, but from the general public. Insofar as an international currency implies giving up an accustomed one, it runs against the very nationalism that all states eagerly bred for so long. This would be a problem especially if the public in the dominated countries were asked to adopt the dominant state’s currency directly—name and all—because the underlying imperialist nature of such a monetary system would then become dangerously apparent. Yine de bir miktar diplomasi ve sabır propagandası ile bu sorun da çözülebilir görünüyor. Ulusalcı ya da anti-emperyalist duyguları uyandırmamak için yeni bir adla yeni bir para birimi oluşturulmalı ve mevcut ulusal para birimleri açısından tanımlanmalıdır. This new currency must only be somewhat overvalued against the various national monies (which in turn are defined in terms of the new currency) in order to drive all national monies out of circulation (in accordance with Gresham’s law).[^31] This must be accompanied by the states’ and the economic elites’ constant appeal to the general public’s sound economic intuition that—regardless of all nationalistic feelings—freely fluctuating national monies are an anachronistic institution which cripples rational economic calculation, and that it is in everyone’s best interest to have an internationally (and if possible universally) used money such as the international banking system under the leadership of the dominant state’s central bank is willing to provide. Barring any drastic change in public opinion in the direction of a strengthened private property and sound money orientation and a correspondingly increased antistate vigilance, nothing will prevent the dominant state from achieving this complete international counterfeiting autonomy. And with a world money and world bank in place, and controlled by the dominant state’s central bank, a decisive step is taken toward reaching its ultimate goal of establishing itself as a full-scale world government, with world-wide control not only over counterfeiting, but also over taxation and legal regulation.

In light of this explanation of monetary imperialism and its function as a “natural” (from a statist viewpoint, that is) complement of military expansionism, the remaining pieces from the history of international politics fall into place. Hand in hand with the rise of Great Britain to the rank of the foremost imperialist nation state went a sterling imperialism. Not entirely free at the time of all internal obstacles in the way of counterfeiting, British-dominated countries were compelled to keep their reserves in the form of sterling balances in London, where the Bank of England would redeem them in gold. This way, these countries would pyramid their national currencies on top of the pound, and Britain could inflate sterling notes on top of gold without having to fear an outflow of gold. With Britain’s decline and the concurrent rise of the U.S. government to the position of the world’s leading military power, sterling imperialism has gradually been replaced by a dollar imperialism. At the end of World War II, with U.S. domination extended over most of the globe, and essentially ratified in the Bretton Woods agreement, the dollar became the world reserve currency on top of which all other states have inflated their various national paper monies.[^32] For a while, the U.S. officially still maintained the pretense of redeeming foreign central banks’ dollars in gold, and this somewhat limited its own inflationary potential. However, it did not prevent steady dollar counterfeiting on top of gold from occurring. The position of the U.S. as a militarily dominant international power (in the meantime formalized through a number of military pacts, most notably the NATO) allowed it to compel foreign governments to exercise their right to ask for redemption only sparingly if at all, so that its own dollar inflation could take place without setting off contractive consequences. And when its counterfeiting policy had incited foreign governments to become all too daring in their attempts to obtain gold at bargain prices, it was the U.S. government’s superior military might that finally allowed it to give up all pretense and declare its notes irredeemable. Since then the Federal Reserve System has acquired the position of an autonomous counterfeiter of last resort to the entire international banking system.[^33]

The imperialist nature of this dollar standard takes effect in particular through such instruments as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), and the Bank for International Settlement (BIS).[^34] Money and credit, created by the strike of a pen, is passed from these U.S.-dominated institutions first to foreign governments which inflate their national currencies on top of it and in turn pass this money on to their own cartelized banking system which, adding a further dose of counterfeiting, then hand it on to the various states’ favorite business establishments whence it ripples to the economic periphery. Parallel to this flow of money goes a reversed process of income and wealth redistribution from the periphery onto national business and banking elites and the various nation states as well as from the dominated territories to the U.S. government and the U.S. banking and business establishment as the ultimate center of world finance.

From a sociological point of view, the consequences are particularly interesting if these two integrated processes are superimposed on pre-modern, feudal societies. Such countries, primarily in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, are typically characterized by a class of feudal landlords, or feudal landlords-turned-financial-orindustrial-magnates controlling the state apparatus and mostly residing in the capital-city-and-seat-of-government; and by a class of largely landless, dependent peasants dispersed over the countryside and sustaining the state, the feudal elite, and the capital city through the payment of land rents.[^35] Dollar imperialism here means upholding feudal rule, supporting and participating in the exploitation of an impoverished peasantry and the countryside by a parasitic feudal caste and the capital city, and contributing in the latter’s suppression of any liberationist land reform movement. In fact, the typical Third World cycle of ruthless government oppression, revolutionary movements, civil war, renewed suppression, and prolonged economic dependency and mass poverty is to a significant extent caused and maintained by the U.S.-dominated international monetary system.

Since 1971, in particular, increased efforts have been undertaken in the direction of the second step in the process of monetary expansionism. Not all of the roughly 160 freely fluctuating currencies actually pose a problem, because most of them are in no danger for internal reasons of appreciating against the dollar and thereby strengthening the respective states’ power vis-à-vis that of the U.S. government, or they play such a minor role in international trade that the calculational chaos which is introduced by their existence is largely insignificant. However, because of the relative strength of their currencies and their important role in international trade, the major West European states as well as Japan are a problem. Hence it is to these states and currencies in particular that U.S-led attempts to create a world currency that helps rationalize economic calculation and at the same time safeguard U.S. domination and further increase its own inflationary powers have been directed. The creation of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), defined initially in terms of sixteen and later five leading export nations, and issued by the IMF, was a move toward a one-world currency and a one-world bank under U.S. domination.[^36] Another important push toward this goal was provided through the activities of the Trilateral Commission (TC), founded in 1973 as an offshoot of David Rockefeller’s Council on Foreign Relations. Composed of some 300 highly influential politicians, bankers, businessmen, as well as intellectuals and journalists from North America, Western Europe and Japan, the TC has made the establishment of a world paper currency and a world central bank its primary concern.[^37] TC tarafından bu nihai hedefe doğru bir ara adım olarak ve diğer birçok politika bankacısı-sanayici dernek tarafından TC ile üyelik arasında önemli bir fikirbirliği olması ve aynı amaçlara yönlenmiş olması nedeniyle övgüyle destek veriyor. Destek verenler Avrupa Para Birliği, Avrupa Topluluğu'nun Bankacılık Federasyonu, ECU Bankacılık Birliği, Basel Komitesi ve Wilton Park Grubu. Avrupa parasal cephesinin düzenlenmesinde büyük ilerlemeler kaydedildi. In 1979, the newly created European Currency Unit (ECU), issued under the aegis of the European Economic Community, first appeared. Defined as a weighted average of ten European currencies, and assisted by organizations such as the European Monetary System, the European Investment Bank, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications, and the European Monetary Cooperation Fund, the ECU has assumed a more and more important rule. Since as an average it is less volatile than the various national currencies, multinational banks and corporations in particular have found it increasingly attractive to use the ECU as a unit of account and a medium of settlement: economic calculation is less haphazard with only three currencies—the ECU, the yen, and the dollar—than with a dozen. In 1998, according to official intergovernmental agreements, the European Central Bank was established and the ECU became the all-European currency supplanting all national monies.[^38]

With the European calculational chaos solved, then, and in particular with the European hard currency countries neutralized and weakened within a cartel that by its very nature favors more against less inflationary countries so as to protect and prolong U.S. hegemony over Europe, little indeed would remain to be done. With essentially only three central banks and currencies and U.S. dominance over Europe and Japan, the most likely candidates to be chosen as a U.S-dominated World Central Bank are the IMP or the BIS: and under its aegis then, initially defined as a basket of the dollar, the ECU, and the yen, the “phoenix” (or whatever else its name may be) will rise as a one-world paper currency—unless, that is, public opinion as the only constraint on government growth undergoes a substantial change and the public begins to understand the lesson explained in this book: that economic rationality as well as justice and morality demand a worldwide gold standard and free, 100-percentreserve banking as well as free markets worldwide; and that world government, a world central bank and a world paper currency—contrary to the deceptive impression of representing universal values—actually means the universalization and intensification of exploitation, counterfeiting-fraud and economic destruction.[^39]

[^30]: On the purchasing power parity theory, see Mises, *Human Action,* pp. 452–58; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State,* pp. 715–22.

[^31]: On Gresham’s law see Mises, *Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 75, 77; *Human Action*, pp. 78l–83; Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 29–31.

[^32]: On the dollar standard established with the Bretton Woods system, see Henry Hazlitt, *From Bretton Woods to World Inflation* (Chicago: Regnery, 1984).

[^33]: Since 1971, at which time the gold standard was finally suspended, more money has been created than had previously been accumulated by all nations of the world since the beginning of time.

[^34]: Bu kurumların emperyalist doğası üzerine, Gabriel Kolko'ya da bakınız, *Savaş, dünya ve Birleşik Devletler Dış Politikası 1943-1945* (New York: Random House, 1968), pp. 242–340.&#160;&#8617</p> </fn>

[^35]: See Paul A. Baran, *Political Economy of Growth* (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1957), chaps. V–VI.

[^36]: See Hazlitt, From Bretton Woods to World Inflation.

[^37]: Üçlü Komisyonun saygın ABD üyelerinin bir örneği David M. Abshire, Başkan Danışmanı; Ulusal güvenlik danışmanı Frank C. Carlucci; White Head, Dışişleri Bakan Yardımcısı; Alan Greenspan, Federal Rezerv Sistemi Başkanı; Winston Lord, Çin Büyükelçisi; George Bush, Başkan; Federal Rezerv Sisteminin eski Başkanı Paul A. Volcker; Alexander Haig, eski Dışişleri Bakanı; Jean Kirkpatrick, eski ABD Büyükelçisi; David A. Stockman, OMB'nin eski başkanı; Caspar Weinberger, eski Savunma Sekreteri; W. Michael Blumenthal, eski Hazine Bakanı; Eski ulusal güvenlik danışmanı Zbigniew Brzezinski; Harold Brown, eski Savunma Sekreteri; James E. (Jimmy) Carter, former President; Richard N. Cooper, former Undersecretary of State for Economic and Monetary Affairs; Walter Mondale, former Vice President; Anthony M. Solomon, former Undersecretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs; Cyrus Vance, former Secretary of State; Andrew Young, former Ambassador to the U.N.; Lane E. Kirkland, head of AFL-CIO: Flora Lewis, *New York Times*; Thomas Johnson, *Los Angeles Times*; George Will, ABC television and *Newsweek*.

[^38]: See on this also Jeffrey Tucker, “The Contributions of Menger and Mises to the Foundations of Austrian Monetary Theory Together With One Modern Application,” (manuscript 1988), presented at the 13th annual conference of The Association for Private Enterprise Education, Cleveland, Ohio; and Ron Paul, “The Coming World Monetary Order,” A Special Report from the *Ron Paul Investment Letter* (1988). Avrupa Merkez Bankası (ECB) ve son olarak tek-dünya para birimi fikrini destekleyen tanınmış Avrupalılar: G. Agnelli, Fiat Başkanı, TC; J. DEFLASSİEUX, BIS Başkanı, TC; G. Fitzgerald, İrlanda eski Başbakanı, TC; L. Solana, compania telefonica Nacional de Espana, TC; G. thorn, Avrupa Topluluğu Başkanı ve Eski Lüksemburg Başbakanı, TC; N. THYGESEN, ekonomi Profesörü, Kopenhag Üniversitesi, TC; A. agnelli, Fırat Başkan Yardımcısı; E. Balladour, Fransa mali Bakanı; N. Brady, Dillon okuma yatırımları; J. Callaghan, İngiltere Başbakanı K. Carstens, Batı Almanya eski Başkanı; P. Coffey, Amsterdam ekonomi Üniversitesi Profesörü; E. Davignon, eski Avrupa Komisyonu Üyesi; J. Delors, Avrupa Topluluğu eski Başkanı; W. Dusenberg, bis Başkanı; L. Fabius, Fransa eski Başbakanı; J. R. Fouttou, Rhone-poulaence Başkanı; R. d. La Jemere, Banque de France'in eski valisi; V. Giscard d'Estaing, Fransa'nın eski başkanı; Ch. Goodhart, Professor of Banking, London School of Economics; P. Guimbretiere, Director of the European Community’s ECU project; W. Guth, President of the Deutsche Bank; E. Heath, former British Prime Minister; M. Kohnstamm, former President of European University Institute, Florence; N. Lawson, British Chancellor of the Exchequer; L.M. Leveque, President of Credit Lyonnais; L. Lucchini, President of Confindustria Italy; F. Maude, British Minister for Corporate and Consumer Affairs; P. Mentre, Chairman of Credit National, France; H.L. Merkle, Chairman of Bosch Gmbh, West Germany; F. Mitterand, President of France; J. Monet, founder of the European Community; P.X. Ortoli, President of Total Oil and former Commissioner of the European Community; D. Rambure, Credit Lyonnais; H. Schmidt, former Chancellor of West Germany and Editor of die *ZEIT*; P. Sheehy, Chairman of BAT Industries; J. Solvay, Chairman of Solvay, Belgium; H.J. Vogel, Chairman of the German Social Democratic Party; J. Zijlstra, former President of the Nederlandse Bank.

[^39]: Jeffrey Tucker of the Ludwig von Mises Institute had an important influence on my understanding of the dynamics of the international monetary system—through frequent discussions as well as through granting me access to his own related research. Söylemeye gerek yok, tüm eksiklikler tamamen benim eksikliklerim.</footnotes>