## İtibari Medyaya Karşı

Neredeyse tüm çağdaş Avusturyalı ekonomistler merkez bankacılığı için kendi muhalefetlerinde ve serbest rekabetçi bankacılığın bir sisteminin savunmasında birleştiler. Ancak, "serbest rekabetçi bankacılığın" tam anlamı üzerinde üzerinde güçlü bir müzakere ortaya çıkmıştır."Serbest bankacılık" kaynak mevduat bankacılığı gerektiriyor mu veya kısmi rezerv bankacılığına izin veriyor veya hatta zorunlu tutuyor mu? *Avusturya Ekonomisinin İncelenmesi*'nde ortaya çıkan yeni bir makalede, George A. Selgin ve Lawrence White, kısmi rezerv bankacılığı olarak "serbest bankacılığın" iki en önemli çağdaş Avusturyalı koruyucusu, sayısız Avusturyalı eleştirmenlerini ve yüzde 100 rezerv mevduat bankacılığının savunucularını cevaplamak için sistematik bir girişimi üstlendiler.[^1]

Eleştirmenleri tarafından yapılan suçlamalara karşı, Selgin ve White iki tez kanıtlamaya çalışıyorlar. İlk olarak, itibari medyanın bir sorunu olan, dolandırıcılık oluşturmayan fakat sözleşme hürriyeti ilkesi tarafından doğrulanan kısmi rezerv bankacılığının uygulamasını göstermeyi talep ediyorlar, ve bilhassa kısmi rezerv bankacılığının Murray N. Rothbard tarafından geliştirilen sözleşmenin isim transferi teorisi ile uyum içinde olduğunu iddia ediyorlar. (Rothbard gibi kısmi rezerv bankacılığını hileli tutan birinin kendi teorisini kavramasının başarısız olması lazım). İkinci olarak, itibari medya oluşumunun ekonomik verimsizliklere ve diskoordinasyona neden olmadığını fakat aslında farklı bir ekonomik krizi önlemeye yardım edebileceğini ve böylece ekonomik performansı geliştireceğini gösterme girişiminde bulunurlar. Aşağıda, ne merkezi normatif talebin ne de ikinci pozitif talebin kurulmamış olduğunu ispatlayacağız.[^2]

### Dolandırıcılık Sorunu I: Para, Para Yerine Geçenler, İtibari Medya ve Sözleşmenin İsim Transfer Teorisi

Kısmi rezerv bankacılığın dolandırıcılık teşkil edip etmediği sorununun çözümü için baştan beri gerçeklere dayalı birkaç varsayım ve terminolojik sorunun açıklığa kavuşturulması gerekecektir. Neyse ki tartışmanın her iki tarafında da bu hususlarda tam uzlaşma vardır ve böylece son derece kısa özetleyebiliriz. Money cannot but originate as a commodity, such as gold. Altın, öyleyse, para olarak "genel kabul edilebilir değiş tokuş aracı" olarak belirlenir ve kendi "diğer tüm varlıklarla kıyaslamada en yüksek satılabilirliği" ile benzersiz olarak nitelendirilir. (“sahipliği minimum zahmet ile herhangi bir potansiyel satın alma yapabilmek için birini pozisyona koyar” gibi).[^3] Para yerine geçenler, o halede, nakit altının belirlenen miktarına isimler veya sıfatlar olarak tanımlanır. Para yerini alanlar (paper notları) nakit rezervleri (altın) tarafından tamamen kapatılmışssa, Mises "para sertifikaları" olarak ifade eder ve burada para yerine geçenler olarak onlara basitçe değineceğiz. Para yerine geçenler (paper notları) nakit (altın) tarafından örtülmemişse, bunun yerine itibari medya olarak bahsedilmiş olur. [^4]

Bu varsayımlara ve tanımlamalara bağlı olarak, itibari medyanın dolandırıcılık teşkil edip etmediği sorusuna geri dönebiliriz. Neyse ki bu sorunun tartışması Selgin ve White'ın Rothbardian isim transferi sözleşme teorisini açıkça kabul etmesi gerçeği tarafından kolaylaştırıldı. Bu itibari medya sorunu Rothbard ve Hoppe'nin iddiasına göre doğal olarak hilelidir, Selgin ve White

> kabul ettiğimiz ve Rothbard'ın aksine bireyleri karşılıklı olarak (adilce sahip olunan) mülkleriyle kapitalist eylemlerde bulunmaya izin verme özgürlüğünü savunmak için kullanılan isim transfer sözleşme teorisi ile bağdaştırmayı imkansız bulur. Rothbard dolandırıcılığı "bir kendi isteğiyle kabul edilen mülkün üzerinde transferi yerine getirme başarısızlığı" olarak tanımlar. Kısmi rezerv düzenlemeleri o zaman *doğal olarak* veya *kaçınılmaz* hileli olamaz. Özel bir bankanın kısmi rezervleri tutarak dolandırıcılık yapıp yapmadığı, banka ile müşterileri arasındaki isim transfer anlaşmaları koşullarına bağlı olmalıdır.[^5] …
> 
> Whether it is fraudulent to hold fractional reserves against a bank liability does not depend *per se* on whether it is a demand or time liability, but only on whether the bank has misrepresented itself as holding 100 percent reserves. The demandability of a particular claim issued by a bank, i.e., the holder’s contractual option to redeem it at any time, is not *per se* a representation that the bank is holding 100 percent reserves against the total of its demandable claims. Rothbard argues otherwise, based on the view that a bank’s demand deposits and notes are necessarily “warehouse receipts” and not debts. We do not see why bank and customer cannot contractually agree to make them debts and not warehouse receipts, and we believe that historically they have so agreed.[^6]

İlk bakışta kulağa makul gelse de, ciddi bir incelemede karşı koyulamaz. Aslında, alıntılanmış paragraf mülkiyet ve sözleşmeye ilişkin en temel dersin gözden kaçırılmış olduğunu açığa çıkarıyor. Hoppe'nin formulü gibi "iki kişi aynı anda ve aynı şeyin seçkin sahibi olamaz".[^7] Bu değişmez bir ilkedir; hiçbir kontrat değişemez ya da geçersiz kılınamaz bir eylem ve doğa yasasıdır. Rather, any contractual agreement that involves presenting two different individuals as simultaneous owners of the same thing (or alternatively, the same thing as simultaneously owned by more than one person) is objectively false and thus fraudulent.[^8] Hala banka ve müşteri arasındaki kısmi rezerv anlaşması tam olarak budur.

In issuing and accepting a fiduciary note (at a necessarily discounted price), both bank and customer have *in fact*, regardless of whatever they may believe or think about the transaction, agreed to represent themselves—fraudulently—as the owner of one and the same object at the same time. Aslında mevcut mülkiyet miktarına ek başlıklar ve iddialar oluşturmak için anlaşmışlardır. In issuing fiduciary notes, they do not—and cannot—bring more property into existence. Gerçekten de, yapılmayan sözleşme büyük olasılıkla mülkün mevcut miktarını artırabilir, ancak yalnızca transferi (yeniden dağıtılabilir) mevcut mülkü bir kişiden diğerine aktarabilir. Mevcut mülkiyet miktarı sadece ek ödenek ve üretim yoluyla artırılabilir (ve dolayısıyla mülkün miktarı arttıkça mülkiyet başlıklarının sayısı artar). Ancak kesirli rezerv bankacılığı ve mütevelli medya sorunu, var olan mülkiyet miktarını arttırıp artırmamakla birlikte, aynı zamanda (diğer tüm sözleşmeler gibi) mevcut mülkiyet veya eserlerin bir taraftan diğerine mevcut mülkiyet transferi dahil değildir. Neither does the issue and acceptance of a fiduciary note signify a transfer of property from bank to client or vice versa. Banka ve müşteri hesaplarındaki varlık ve yükümlülüklerin dağılımı, bir mütevelli sorunun sonucu olarak, emin olmak için değiştirilmiştir. Ancak mevcut mülk miktarı aslında bankadan müşteriye ya da tam tersi olarak transfer edilmez ve var olan mülkün toplam miktarı değişmeden kalır. Daha ziyade, mütevelli medya mevcut ve değişmemiş mülk stoku üzerinde yeni ve ek başlıklar veya iddiaları temsil eder. Bunlar, banka ya da müşterisi adına ek bir mal tedarikinin sonucu ya da belgelenmiş bir sonucu değildir. Instead, they represent an additional supply of property titles, while the supply of *property* has remained constant. Tam olarak bu anlamda, ince havayla yaratıldıkları iddia edilen medyadan bahsedilebilir. They are property-less titles in search of property. This, in and of itself, constitutes fraud, whether according to Rothbard’s definition of the term as “a failure to fulfill a voluntarily-agreed-upon transfer of property” or according to Selgin and White’s own definition of it as “a *willful* or *deliberate* deception for purposes of gain.” Each issuer and buyer of a fiduciary note (a title to money uncovered by money), regardless of what he may believe, is in fact—objectively—engaged in a misrepresentation for the purpose of personal gain. The bank and its client have consented to misrepresent themselves as the owners of a quantity of property that they do not own and that plainly does not exist; and whenever they buy an existing quantity of property in exchange for titles to a nonexisting quantity of property, they have become invariably and inescapably guilty of an act of fraudulent appropriation.[^9]

[^1]: George Selgin and Lawrence White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media—or, We are Not Devo(lutionists), We are Misesians!” *Review of Austrian Economics* 9 no. 2 (1996): 83–107.

Curiously, in the reply to their various critics, Selgin and White selected as their central target an article by Hans-Hermann Hoppe (“How is Fiat Money Possible?—or, The Devolution of Money and Credit,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 7, no. 2 (1994): 49–74, that deals only cursorily with their position. Other Austrian critics of fractional reserve banking explicitly dealt with in Selgin and White’s article including Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988) and Jesús Huerta de Soto, “A Critical Analysis of Central Banks and Fractional-Reserve Free Banking from the Austrian Perspective,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 8, no. 2 (1995): 25–36\. Murray N. Rothbard, the most prominent critic of fractional reserve banking, is targeted only indirectly; and although several of his works are mentioned in their bibliography, Rothbard’s later writings on the subject (“The Myth of Free Banking in Scotland,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 2 [1988]: 229–57; idem, “Aurophobia: or, Free Banking on What Standard?” *Review of Austrian Economics*, 6, no. 1 [1992]: 97–108; idem, “The Present State of Austrian Economics,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* 6, no. 2 [1995]) are not mentioned. Likewise ignored entirely are the criticisms by Joseph T. Salerno (“Two Traditions in Modern Monetary Theory: John Law and A.R.J. Turgot,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* 2, no. 2/3 [1991]; idem, “The Concept of Coordination in Austrian Macroeconomics,” in *Austrian Economics: Perspectives on the Past and Prospects for the Future*, Richard Ebeling, ed. [Hillsdale, Mich.: Hillsdale College Press, 1991]; and idem, “Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 [1993]: 113–46). Selgin and White also do not address, and in this case could not have done so, the most recent and most extensive criticism of their work by Jörg Guido Hülsmann (“Free Banking and the Free Bankers,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 9, no. 1 [1996]: 3–53).

[^2]: As a doctrinal matter, Selgin and White also suggest that their view of fractional reserve banking coincides with Ludwig von Mises’s view; hence, they call themselves Misesians and claim it is the defenders of 100-percent-reserve banking who are deviationists. Bu talep etmek kabul edilmeyebilir. In fact, Selgin (*The Theory of Free Banking: Money Supply under Competitive Note Issue* [Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988], pp. 60–63) has frankly acknowledged that Mises’s and his own views concerning fiduciary media are contradictory and White’s attempt to claim Mises as a proponent of fractional reserve free banking has been addressed by Salerno (“Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 [1993]: 113–46). Here it suffices to provide a quotation from Mises:

> The main thing is that the government should no longer be in a position to increase the quantity of money in circulation and the amount of cheque-book money not fully—i.e., 100 percent—covered by deposits paid in by the public…. No bank must be permitted to expand the total amount of its deposits subject to cheque or the balance of such deposits of any individual customer … otherwise than by receiving cash deposits … or by receiving a cheque payable by another domestic bank subject to the same limitations. This means a rigid 100 per cent reserve for all future deposits; i.e., all deposits not already in existence on the first day of the reform. (*The Theory of Money and Credit* [Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1978], pp. 438 and 48)

See also notes 11, 25, 37, 47, and 48 below.

[^3]: Lawrence H. White, *Competition and Currency* (New York: New York University Press, 1989).

[^4]: See Salerno, “Ludwig von Mises’s Monetary Theory in Light of Modern Monetary Thought,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 8, no. 1 (1994): 71–115\. Selgin and White highlight the fact that Hoppe referred to them as proponents of “partial fiat money,” but then are ultimately compelled to admit that he did in fact not misrepresent their position as advocates of fractional reserve banking based on an underlying gold standard. Their complaint amounts to no more than a dispute over semantics. We will treat it as such here, too, and will concentrate instead exclusively on substantive disagreements.

There is actually more to the charge of Selgin and White being fiat money advocates in the article under scrutiny. For, in “the mature free-banking system,” according to Selgin and White (but in contrast to the analysis of the operation of such a system given by Mises), a situation is supposed to emerge in which

> At the limit, if inter-clearinghouse settlements were made entirely with other assets (perhaps claims on a super-clearinghouse which itself holds negligible commodity money), and if the public were completely weaned from holding commodity money, the active demand for the old-fashioned money commodity would be wholly nonmonetary. (Lawrence White, *Competition and Currency* [New York: New York University Press, 1989], p. 235)

Thus, notes Salerno (“Ludwig von Mises’s Monetary Theory in Light of Modern Monetary Thought,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 8, no. 1 [1994]: 71–115, p. 76, n. 7) regarding Selgin and White’s ultimate objective, “the public would presumably finally be freed from its shackles of gold to enjoy the virtues of an invisible-hand-generated private fiat money.” Moreover, as far as semantic innovations and deviations from orthodox Misesian terminology, and hence potential sources of confusion are concerned, we have to consider Selgin and White’s own writings. For in referring to money and money substitutes as “outside and “inside” money respectively, in talking of “base money,” “basic money,” “bank money,” “high-powered” and “low-powered” money, and, yes, the gold dollar “as a substitute for bank deposits,” they display an unusual degree of semantic creativity. Moreover, in suggesting, by their selection of terms, that all of these things are somehow equally “money,” their writings actually have become a source of obfuscation. See on this Hülsmann, “Free Banking and the Free Bankers,” pp. 5ff.

[^5]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 86–87.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 87, n. 8.

[^7]: It is also “impossible that some time depositor and borrower are entitled to exclusive control over the same resources” (Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?”, p. 67).

[^8]: Even partners cannot simultaneously own the *same* thing. A and B can each own half of a household, or half the shares in it but they each own a *different* 50 percent. It is as logically impossible for them to own the same half as for two people to occupy the same space. Yes, A and B can both be in New York City at the same time, but only in different parts of it.

[^9]: Jesús Huerta de Soto (“A Critical Analysis of Central Banks,” p. 33) correctly likens the effect of fractional reserve banking to that of the so-called tragedy of the commons. Selgin and White (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 92–93, n. 12) object to de Soto’s analogy on the ground that the tragedy of the commons refers “to a particular sort of technological externality,” according to Selgin and White, involves “a physical or otherwise direct interference with someone’s consumption or production” and represents “interaction outside the market.” In contrast, write Selgin and White, the “externality from fiduciary media” is a harmless pecuniary “effect on someone’s wealth transmitted via the price system,” that is, through changes in the system of relative prices, and represents “an interdependence through the market.” Selgin and White err: an object and a title to an object are not the same thing.

In lumping money and money substitutes together under the joint title of “money,” as if they were somehow the same thing, Selgin and White fail to grasp that the issue of fiduciary media—an increase of property titles—is not the same thing as a larger supply of property and that relative price changes effected through the issue of fiduciary media are an entirely different “externality” matter than price changes effected through an increase in the supply of property. With this the fundamental distinction between property and a property title in mind, de Soto’s analogy between fractional reserve banking and the tragedy of the commons makes perfect sense. As under the scenario of a tragedy of the commons, every issue of fiduciary media—to titles in search of property—sets in motion a rush, always starting with the bank and its client, to fill these empty tickets with existing property; and in the course of this rush, invariably the first-comers will physically enrich themselves (through the appropriation of existing quantities of property) at the expense of a corresponding impoverishment of later-comers, whose quantity of existing property is physically diminished while they have been left with a larger number of property tickets.