## #

Não pode haver dúvida, então, que os impostos reduzem invariavelmente a produção e, com isso, o padrão de vida do consumidor. Qualquer que seja a forma de como as coisas são colocadas, é forçoso concluir que a tributação é um meio de impedir a formação de riqueza e criando assim o empobrecimento relativo.

Isto leva-me ao meu segundo tema: a sociologia da tributação. Se a tributação é um instrumento para a destruição da riqueza, então a questão torna-se imediatamente pressionante de como pode ser explicado que não há tributação; que há cada vez mais; que temos vivido, em especial durante os últimos cem anos, um aumento constante, não só em termos absolutos, mas também no nível de tributação; e que as instituições que lideram o caminho neste processo, os estados fiscais do Mundo Ocidental, simultaneamente, têm assumido cada vez mais posições poderosas na arena da política internacional e, cada vez mais, dominar o resto do mundo.

Com estas perguntas sai-se da esfera da teoria económica. Economia responde à pergunta "Qual a consequência, se a tributação é introduzida?" conclui-se da sua resposta a partir de uma compreensão do significado da ação e do sentido da tributação como um tipo particular de ação. Por que existe a tributação é um objecto da psicologia, história, ou sociologia. Economia, ou melhor, praxeologia, reconhece que todas as ações são determinadas por ideias, correto ou incorreto, bom ou mau. Mas não tenta explicar o que essas ideias são e como as pessoas vêm para as manter ou alterá-las. Em vez disso, supõe-se que sejam dadas e visa explicar as consequências lógicas que agindo sobre elas, sejam elas quais forem. História e Sociologia perguntam o que estas ideias são, como as pessoas vêm para entreter-las, e por que elas agem dessa forma.[^16]

Em um nível altamente abstrato a resposta para a pergunta por que não há tributação crescente é esta: A raiz da causa para isto é lenta, mas uma mudança dramática na ideia de justiça que teve lugar na opinião pública.

Deixe-me explicar. Pode-se adquirir bens através de propriedades, produção e contratação de serviços, ou então, através da expropriação e exploração de propriedades, produtores ou prestadores de serviços. Não existem outras formas.[^17] Ambos os métodos são naturais para a humanidade. Juntamente com a produção e contratação sempre houve um processo de aquisições de bens e não produtivos e não contratuais. Assim como empresas produtivas podem evoluir para empresas e corporações, assim pode o negócio de expropriação e exploração ocorrer em uma escala maior e evoluir para governos e estados.[^18] Que a tributação como tal existe e que existe um impulso para aumento da tributação não deve vir como uma surpresa. A ideia de não produtivas ou de dotações não contratuais é quase tão antiga quanto a ideia dos produtivos, e toda a gente - o explorador certamente não menos do que o produtor-prefere uma maior rentabilidade de que uma mais baixa.

A questão decisiva é esta: o que controla e limita o tamanho e o crescimento de um negócio?

Deve ficar claro que as limitações no tamanho das empresas no negócio de expropriar os produtores e prestadores de serviços são categoricamente de diferente natureza, do que aquelas que limitam o tamanho das empresas envolvidas em trocas produtivas. Contrariamente à alegação da escola da escolha pública, o governo e as empresas privadas não fazem essencialmente o mesmo tipo de negócio. Eles estão envolvidos categoricamente em diferentes tipos de operações.[^19]

The size of a productive enterprise is constrained on the one hand by consumer demand (which imposes a definite limit on the total revenue attainable), and on the other hand by the competition of other producers, which continuously forces each firm to operate with the lowest possible costs if it wishes to stay in business. For such an enterprise to grow in size the most urgent consumer wants must be served in the most efficient ways. Nothing but voluntary consumer purchases support its size.

The constraints on the other type of firm, of government or the state, are altogether different. For one thing, it is absurd to say that its size is determined by demand in the same sense as the size of a private firm is determined by demand. One cannot say, by any stretch of the imagination, that the homesteaders, the producers, and the contractors who must surrender part of their assets to a government have demanded such a service. Instead, they must be coerced into accepting it, and this is conclusive proof of the fact that the service is not actually in demand at all. Hence, demand cannot be considered as a limit on the size of government. Insofar as it grows, the state grows by acting in open *contradiction* to demand.

The state is also not in the same way constrained by competition as is a productive firm. Unlike such a firm, the state must not keep its cost of operation at a minimum but can operate at above-minimum costs because it is able to shift its higher costs onto competitors by taxing or regulating their behavior. Thus, the size of the state also cannot be considered as constrained by cost competition. Insofar as it grows, it does so in spite of the fact that it is *not* cost-efficient.

This, however, is not to say that the size of government is not constrained at all and that the historical fluctuations in the size of states are mere random walks. It only states that the constraints on the firm “government” must be fundamentally different.

Instead of being constrained by cost and demand conditions, the growth of an exploitative firm is constrained by public opinion:[^20] It is not voluntarily supported, but by its very nature employs coercion. On the other side of the same coin, coercion implies creating victims, and victims are not supporters but active or passive resisters of a firm’s size. It is conceivable that this resistance can be lastingly broken by force in the case of one man, or one group of men, exploiting one or maybe two or three others, or another group of roughly the same size. It is inconceivable, however, to imagine that force alone can account for the breaking down of resistance in the actually familiar case of small minorities operating their business of expropriating and exploiting populations tens, hundreds, or thousands of times their size.[^21] For this to happen, such a firm must have public support in addition to its coercive force. A majority of the population must accept its operations as legitimate. This acceptance can range from active enthusiasm to passive resignation. But there must be acceptance in the sense that a majority must have given up the idea of actively or passively resisting any attempt to enforce nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. Instead of displaying outrage over such actions, of showing contempt for everyone who engages in them, and of doing nothing to help make them successful (not to mention actively trying to obstruct them), a majority must actively or passively support them. Only in light of this can it be explained how the few can govern the many. State-supportive public opinion must counterbalance the resistance of victimized property owners to the extent that active resistance appears futile.

The state of public opinion also imposes a constraint on the size of the state in another respect. Every firm in the large-scale business of property expropriation must naturally aim to be a monopolist in a definite territory, for one can only prosper in such a business so long as there is something that can be expropriated. However, if competition were allowed in the business of expropriating, there would obviously be nothing left to take. Hence, in order to stay in business, one must be a monopolist.

Even if there is no internal competition, competition between governments operating in *different* territories still exists, and it is this competition that imposes severe limits on the size of government. On the one hand, it opens up the possibility that people may vote with their feet against a government and leave its territory if they perceive other territories as offering less exploitative living conditions. Naturally, each state must see this as a crucial problem, for it literally lives off a population, and any population loss is thus a loss of potential state-income.[^22] Again, the state of public opinion is of utmost importance for maintaining exploitative rule. Only if the state succeeds in generating the impression in the general public that that state’s own territory compares favorably, or at least tolerably well with others will it be able to secure and expand its position.

Public opinion also plays a decisive role in the case of interstate aggression. While not a logical necessity, the nature of a state as an exploitative enterprise still makes it highly likely (not the least because of the just addressed problem of population movements) that it will become engaged in aggression against a “foreign” territory, or that it must defend itself against such aggression from other states.[^23] Moreover, in order to emerge successfully from such interstate wars or warlike actions, a state must be in command of sufficient (in relative terms) economic resources that alone make its actions sustainable. However, these resources can only be provided by a productive population. Thus, to secure the means necessary to win wars and avoid being confronted with slackening productive outputs while at war, public opinion again turns out to be the decisive variable controlling the size of government. Only if popular support for the state’s war exists can it be sustained and possibly won.

Finally, the state of public opinion limits the size of government in yet a third way. While the state maintains its position vis-à-vis the exploited population through coercion and the successful management of public opinion, to maintain its own internal order, which regulates the relationships between the various branches of government and its employees, there is nothing else at its disposal but public opinion, for clearly, no one outside the state exists who could enforce its internal rules upon it. Rather, the enforcement must be accomplished exclusively by means of supportive public opinion among state employees themselves in the various branches of government.[^24] That is, the president cannot coerce the general to go to war—in fact, the greater physical strength would probably be on the general’s side; and the general in turn cannot coerce his soldiers to do the fighting and killing—in fact, they could smash him anytime. President and general can only succeed because of favorable intrastate public opinion, and only insofar as the overwhelming majority of the state employees at least passively supports their actions as legitimate. If, in the various branches of government, a large majority of them were strictly opposed to the enforcement of presidential policy, it could not be put into action successfully. The general who thinks most of his troops consider the war illegitimate or who thinks that the Congress, the IRS, the large majority of public educators and the so-called social services regard such actions as outrageous and to be openly opposed, would face an impossible task even if he himself supported the presidential command.[^25]

With public opinion rather than demand and cost conditions thus identified as the constraining force on the size of government, I return to my original explanation of the phenomenon of ever-increasing taxation as “simply” a change in prevailing ideas.

If it is public opinion that ultimately limits the size of an exploitative firm, then an explanation of its growth in purely ideological terms is justified. Indeed, any other explanation, not in terms of ideological changes but of changes in “objective” conditions must be considered wrong. The size of government does not increase because of any objective causes over which ideas have no control and certainly not because there is a demand for it. It grows because the ideas that prevail in public opinion of what is just and what is wrong have changed. What once was regarded by public opinion as an outrage, to be treated and dealt with as such, has become increasingly accepted as legitimate.

What has happened regarding the general public’s conception of justice?[^26]

[^16]: To make this distinction between economics and history or sociology is not to say, of course, that economics is of no importance for these latter disciplines. In fact, economics is indispensable for all other social sciences. While the reverse is not the case, economics can be developed and advanced without historical or sociological knowledge. The only consequence of doing so is that such economics would probably not be very interesting, as it would be written without consideration of real examples or instances of application (as if one were to write on the economics of taxation even though there had never been an actual example of it in all of history), for it would formulate what could not possibly happen in the social world, or what would have to happen provided that certain conditions were in fact fulfilled. Thus, any historical or sociological explanation is logically constrained by the laws as espoused by economic theory, and any account by a historian or sociologist in violation of these laws must be treated as ultimately confused. On the relationship between economic theory and history see also Ludwig von Mises, *Theory and History* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^17]: See on this also Franz Oppenheimer, *The State* (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914) esp. pp. 24–27; Rothbard, *Power and Market*, chap. 2; Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chap. 2.

[^18]: On the theory of the state as developed in the following see—in addition to the works cited in note 17—in particular Herbert Spencer, *Social Statics* (New York: Schalkenbach Foundation, 1970); Auberon Herbert, *The Right and Wrong of Compulsion by the State* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1978); Albert J. Nock, *Our Enemy, the State* (Tampa, Fla.: Hallberg Publishing, 1983); Murray N. Rothbard, *For a New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); Anthony de Jasay, *The State* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).

[^19]: This central idea of the public choice school has been expressed by its foremost representatives as follows:

> Both the economic relation and the political relation represent cooperation on the part of two or more individuals. The market and the state are both devices through which co-operation is organized and made possible. Men co-operate through exchange of goods and services in organized markets, and such co-operation implies mutual gain. The individual enters into an exchange relationship in which he furthers his own interest by providing some product or service that is of direct benefit to the individual on the other side of the transaction. At base, political or collective action under the individualistic view of the State is much the same. Two or more individuals find it mutually advantageous to join forces to accomplish certain common purposes. In a very real sense, they “exchange” and devote resources to the construction of the common good. (James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* [Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press], p. 192)

Surely, the most amazing thing about such a “new theory of politics” is that anyone takes it seriously. Remarks Joseph A. Schumpeter on such views:

> The theory which construes taxes on the analogy of club dues or the purchase of the service of, say, a doctor only proves how far removed this part of the social sciences is from scientific habits of mind. (*Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy* [New York: Harper, 1942], p. 198)

And H.L. Mencken has this to say regarding a thesis such as Buchanan’s and Tullock’s:

> The average man, whatever his errors otherwise, at least sees clearly that government is something lying outside him and outside the generality of his fellow men—that it is a separate, independent and often hostile power, only partly under his control, and capable of doing him great harm…. Is it a fact of no significance that robbing the government is everywhere regarded as a crime of less magnitude than robbing an individual, or even a corporation? … When a private citizen is robbed a worthy man is deprived of the fruits of his industry and thrift; when the government is robbed the worst that happens is that certain rogues and loafers have less money to play with than they had before. The notion that they have earned that money is never entertained; to most sensible men it would seem ludicrous. They are simply rascals who, by accidents of law, have a somewhat dubious right to a share in the earnings of their fellow men. When that share is diminished by private enterprise the business is, on the whole, far more laudable than not. (*A Mencken Chrestomathy* [New York: Vintage Books, 1949] pp. 146–47)

[^20]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Anatomy of the State” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974), esp. pp. 37–42.

[^21]: It might be thought that the government could accomplish such a feat by merely improving its weaponry: by threatening with atomic bombs instead of with guns and rifles, so to speak. However, since realistically one must assume that the technological know-how of such improved weaponry can hardly be kept secret, especially if it is in fact applied, then with the state’s improved instruments for instilling fear the victims’ ways amid means of resisting improve as well. Hence, such advances must be ruled out as an explanation of what must be explained.

[^22]: Witness the all-too-numerous states that go so far as to shoot everyone down without mercy who has committed no other sin than that of trying to leave a territory and move elsewhere!

[^23]: On the intimate relationship between state and war see the important study by Ekkehart Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1985); also Charles Tilly, “War Making and State Making as Organized Crime” in Peter Evans et al., eds., *Bringing the State Back In* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).

[^24]: This insight (which refutes all talk about the impossibility of anarchism in showing that intra-governmental relations are, in fact, a case of—political—anarchy) has been explained in a highly important article by Alfred G. Cuzán, “Do We Ever Really Get Out of Anarchy,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979).

> Wherever earthly governments are established or exist, anarchy is officially prohibited for all members of society, usually referred to as subjects or citizens. They can no longer relate to each other on their own terms…. Rather, all members of society must accept an external “third party”—a government—into their relationships, a third party with the coercive powers to enforce its judgments and punish detractors…. However, such a “third party” arrangement for society is non-existent among those who exercise the power of government themselves. In other words, there is no “third party” to make and enforce judgments among the individual members who make up the third party itself. The rulers still remain in a state of anarchy *vis-à-vis* each other. They settle disputes *among themselves*, without regard for a Government (an entity outside themselves). Anarchy still exists. Only whereas without government it was market or natural anarchy, it is now a *political* anarchy, an anarchy inside power. (Cuzán, pp. 152–53)

[^25]: One of the classic expositors of this idea is David Hume. In his essay, “Of The First Principles of Government,” he writes:

> Nothing appears more surprising to those, who consider human affairs with a philosophical eye, than the easiness with which the many are governed by the few; and the implicit submission, with which men resign their own sentiments and passions to those of their rulers. When we enquire by what means this wonder is effected, we shall find, that as FORCE is always on the side of the governed, the governors have nothing to support them but opinion. It is therefore, on opinion only that government is founded; and this maxim extends to the most despotic and most military governments, as well as to the most free and most popular. The soldan of EGYPT, or the emperor of ROME, might drive his harmless subjects, like brute beasts, against their sentiments and inclination: but he must, at least, have led his *mamalukes*, or *praetorian bands*, like men, by their opinion. (*Essays, Moral, Political and Literary* [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971], p. 19)

[^26]: See on the following in particular also Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right: The Prospects for Liberty” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays*.