## A Economia e Sociologia da Tributação

Como o título do capítulo indica, eu estabeleci os meus dois objetivos. Primeiro, eu prentendo explicar o efeito económico geral da tributação. Esta parte deste capítulo representa uma análise praxeological da tributação e como tal não é esperado ir muito além do que já foi dito por outros economistas.

Poderá ser encontrada mais originalidade na segunda parte, onde vou tentar responder à seguinte pergunta: porque é que há tributação; e porque é que há sempre mais do mesmo? Responder a estas perguntas não é uma tarefa da teoria económica, mas sim de interpretações e reconstruções sociológicas ou históricas praxeologicamente informadas e restritas, e desde o início existe muito mais espaço para a especulação neste campo de investigação intelectual.

## #

Para dizer que não há nada de novo a declarar quanto aos efeitos económicos da tributação, não dizer que o * é </ 0> não seria uma novidade para muitos. De fato, depois de pesquisar vários livros populares de economia, pode parecer que o que tenho a dizer é novidade para a maioria dos economistas e estudantes de economia nos dias de hoje. Na medida em que esses textos falam dos efeitos económicos da tributação, além de uma apresentação puramente descritiva de vários esquemas fiscais e do seu histórico desenvolvimento [^1], eles são quase completamente silenciosos sobre a questão de quais são os efeitos gerais de tributação. Além disso, na discussão sobre o problema da incidência fiscal, o que estes textos dizem sobre os efeitos económicos de formas específicas de tributação é invariavelmente defeituoso.</p> 

No entanto, este estado de coisas apenas reflete um processo de degeneração intelectual. Há quase 150 anos, quase tudo o que deveria ser entendido nos dias de hoje, sobre a economia da tributação tinha sido afirmado de uma forma correta e convincente por uma figura tão destacada na história da economia como o Jean Baptiste, disse no seu *Tratado de Economia Política*.

Em contraste com os escritores de livros de hoje, que atribuem a discussão da tributação a lugares arbitrários dentro da arquitectónica geral dos seus livros, que dizem desde o início e localizam corretamente o fenómeno sob o título geral "Do Consumo de Riqueza"

Ele, então, identifica e explica inequivocamente a tributação como um ataque e punição da aquisição e produção de bens, que leva necessariamente a uma redução na formação de riqueza incorporada em tais propriedades e a uma redução do padrão geral de vida.

As notas dizem:

> É um absurdo flagrante em fingir, que a tributação contribui para a riqueza nacional, absorvendo parte dos produtos nacionais e enriquecendo a nação ao consumir parte de sua riqueza.[^2]
> 
> A tributação é a transferência de uma parte dos produtos nacionais, das mãos de indivíduos para as do governo, com o propósito de satisfazer o consumo e as despesas públicas. Qualquer que seja a denominação que ele envolve, seja de imposto, contribuição, dever, impostos especiais de consumo, personalizado, auxílio, subsídio, subvenção ou presente gratuito, é praticamente imposta uma carga aos indivíduos, quer de caráter separado ou corporativo, pelo poder de decisão do momento, com o objectivo de fornecer o consumo que ele possa achar adequado fazendo às suas custas; em suma, um imposto no sentido literal. [^3]

Uma vez que tais ideias fundamentais parecem ter sido esquecidas, ou pelo menos já não parecem ser tão óbvias nos dias de hoje, deixe-me apresentar novamente como sendo a minha primeira tarefa, um relato praxeológico e uma explicação para o argumento central de Say’s e sua validade e, assim, refutar alguns " contra-argumentos "que afirmam demonstrar que a tributação não precisa obstruir a formação de bens e de riqueza. À luz desta explicação geral, eu irei então demonstrar a falácia da lógica fundamental na análise padrão de livros didáticos de incidência nos impostos.

Essa tributação - sobre tudo e acima de tudo - é e deve ser entendida como um meio para a destruição de bens e a formação de riqueza decorre de uma simples análise lógica do significado da tributação.

A tributação é uma transferência não contratual coerciva de ativos físicos definitivos (hoje em dia principalmente dinheiro, mas não exclusivamente) e o valor neles incorporado, de uma pessoa ou grupo de pessoas que primeiro detinham esses ativos e de quem poderia ter derivado uma receita que os prende ainda mais, para outro que agora os possui e agora obtém uma receita por assim dizer. Como é que esses ativos chegaram às mãos dos seus proprietários originais? Declarando que este foi o resultado de um outro ato de tributação anterior, e verificando que apenas esses ativos podem ser tributados e que ainda não foram consumidoss ou cujo o seu valor ainda não tenha sido esgotado por meio de atos de consumo (um cobrador de impostos não retira o lixo de outro homem, mas sim os seus bens valiosos!), existem três e apenas três possibilidades: eles adquirem a posse, quer por terem percebido que certos bens determinados pela natureza como escassos e ter sido trazido tão ativamente à sua posse antes de qualquer uma outra pessoa o ter visto e e ter feito; por ter sido produzido por meio de um trabalho fora de tais bens previamente apropriados; ou através da aquisição voluntária e contratual de um produtor ou um anterior apropriador. Somente através desse tipo de atividades será possível de adquirir e aumentar os ativos valiosos e tributáveis. Os atos de apropriação original, transformam algo que anteriormente ninguém havia percebido como uma possível fonte de receita em um ativo de receita; os atos de produção são pela sua própria natureza visados para a transformação de um bem menos valioso em um mais valioso; e todas as trocas contratuais dizem respeito à mudança e redirecionamento de ativos específicos, das mãos daqueles que valorizam a sua posse e menos para aqueles que mais os valorizam.

Disto resulta que qualquer seja a forma de tributação, implica uma redução do rendimento que uma pessoa espera poder receber da dotação original, da produção ou da contratação. Como estas atividades exigem o emprego de meios escassos - pelo menos o tempo e o uso do próprio corpo - que podem ser usados para consumo e/ou lazer, o custo de oportunidade de realizá-los é aumentado. A utilidade marginal da apropriação, produção e contratação diminuida, e a utilidade marginal do consumo e do lazer é aumentada. Consequentemente, haverá uma tendência para inverter os papéis anteriores para os últimos. [^4]

Assim, através da transferência coerciva valiosa de ativo ainda não consumados dos seus produtores (no sentido mais amplo do termo incluindo os apropriadores e os contratados) para as pessoas que não os produziram, a tributação reduz o rendimento atual dos seus produtores e o seu nível atual de consumo. Além disso, faz reduzir o incentivo atual para a produção futura de ativos valiosos e portanto, também diminui a futura receita e o nível futuro do consumo disponível. Tributação não é apenas uma punição de consumo sem qualquer efeito sobre os esforços produtivos; é também um ataque na produção como o único meio de providenciar, para o possível aumento futuro da receita e das despesas com o consumo. By lowering the present value associated with future-directed, value-productive efforts, taxation raises the effective rate of time preference, i.e., the rate of originary interest and, accordingly, leads to a shortening of the period of production and provision and so exerts an inexorable influence of pushing mankind into the direction of an existence of living from hand to mouth. Apenas aumente o suficiente à tributação, e terá a humanidade reduzida ao nível das bestas animais.

Straightforward as such reasoning may seem, there are a number of popular objections raised against it. For instance, from the side of economists who falsely conceive of economics as an empirical science that produces nothing but hypothetical explanations which invariably must be tested against empirical evidence in order to be validated (analogous to the situation in the natural sciences), the following argument is frequently heard: Empirically, it has been observed repeatedly that a rise in the level of taxation was actually accompanied by a rise (not a fall) in GNP or other measures of productive output; hence, the above reasoning, however plausible, must be considered empirically invalid. In fact, some empiricists of this sort go even further and make the stronger claim that taxation actually helps increase the standard of living as evidenced by the fact that some countries with once low standards of living and low levels of taxation now enjoy a much greater wealth with much higher taxes.

Both objections are simply confused. Experience cannot beat logic, and interpretations of observational evidence which are not in line with the laws of logical reasoning are no refutation of these but the sign of a muddled mind (or would one accept someone’s observational report that he had seen a bird that was red and non-red all over at the same time as a refutation of the law of contradiction rather than the pronouncement of an idiot?).

As regards the stronger thesis, it is nothing but a beautiful illustration of the ever so attractive *post hoc ergo propter hoc* fallacy. From the fact that the correlated events of high taxation and wealth were to be observed later than those of low taxation and wealth it is inferred that increased taxation increases wealth. Yet to reason in this way is about as convincing as the argument—justly ridiculed by Say—that one can observe rich men consuming more than poor ones; therefore, their high level of consumption must be responsible for the fact that they are rich.[^5] Just as it follows from the meaning of consumption that this is impossible and that, on the contrary, the rich are not rich because of their high level of consumption but because they previously abstained from consumption and engaged instead in value-productive actions, so it follows from the meaning of taxation that mankind cannot have prospered because of higher levels of taxation but despite such a fact.

The weaker thesis—that experience would at least disprove any claim of a relationship between taxation and productive output that was negative by necessity—is also off the mark. The praxeological reasoning presented above does not at all rule out what empiricist economists falsely interpret as a refutation. In this earlier discussion the conclusion had been reached that the effect of taxation is a relative reduction in the production of valuable assets—a reduction, that is, as compared with the level of output that would have been produced had there been no taxation at all or had the level of taxation not been raised. Nothing was said or implied with respect to the absolute level of the output of valuable assets. As a matter of fact, absolute growth of GNP, for instance, is not only compatible with our earlier praxeological analysis, but can even be seen as a perfectly normal phenomenon to the extent that advances in productivity are possible and actually take place. If it has become possible through improvements in the technology of production to produce a higher output with an identical input (in terms of cost), or a physically identical output with a reduced input, then the coincidence of increased taxation and an increased output of valuable assets is anything but surprising. However, this does not in the least affect the validity of what has been stated about relative impoverishment resulting from taxation. With a given state of technological knowledge, though it may change over time, and taxation being what it is (a punishment of value-productive efforts), the level of productive output must be lower than the one that could have been attained with the same knowledge and no or lower taxation. Statistical studies here are entirely beside the point: they can neither help strengthen it, nor can they ever be used to weaken it.

Another theoretical objection which enjoys some popularity is that imposing or raising taxes leads to a reduction of income derived from the assets taxed; that this reduction raises the marginal utility of such assets as compared to what can be derived from other forms of activity; and thus, instead of lowering it, taxation actually helps increase the tendency to engage in production. For the usual case of taxing money assets this is to say that taxes reduce monetary income which raises the marginal utility of money, and this in turn increases the incentive to attain monetary returns. This argument, to be sure, is perfectly true as far as it goes. However, it is a misconception to believe that it does anything to invalidate the relative impoverishment thesis that I have advanced. First of all, in order to keep the record straight it should be noted that even if it were true—as the just presented argument seems to suggest, albeit falsely as we will see—that increased taxation does not lead to a relatively lower output of valuable assets produced since it spurs a proportional increase in workaholism, it is still the case that the income of value-productive individuals has fallen. Even if they produce the same output as previously, they can only do so if they expend more labor now than before. Since any additional labor expenditure implies forgone leisure or consumption (leisure or consumption which they otherwise could have enjoyed along with the same output of valuable assets), their overall standard of living must be lower.[^6]

It now becomes apparent why the assumption that taxation can leave the productive output of valuable assets unaffected and exclusively cripple consumption is fatally flawed. If taxation reduces one’s income (which includes that derived from present consumption and leisure), and given the universal fact of time preference, that is, that human actors invariably prefer present goods over future goods (that they cannot do without continuous consumption and can engage in lengthier, more roundabout methods of production only if a provision in the form of consumption goods has been made for the corresponding waiting period), then it necessarily follows that a person’s effective rate of time preference must have been raised through this very act (the disutility of waiting must have increased), and that he will have to shorten the length of the structure of production as compared to the one that he otherwise would have chosen. Accordingly, his output of valuable assets available at future dates will have to be lower than would be the case otherwise. If with lower or no taxation his income had been higher and his time preference schedule being given (whatever it happens to be at any particular point in time), he would have invested in lengthier production processes. As a consequence, his output of valuable future assets would have been relatively greater.[^7]

The error in the thesis that taxation can have a neutral effect on production lies in the fact that time preference is not taken into account. The argument presently under scrutiny is quite correct in pointing out that taxation implies a twofold signal: on the one hand the substitution effect working in favor of consumption and leisure and against work; and on the other hand the income effect of raising the marginal utility of the taxed asset. However, it is false to interpret this simplistically as a mixed bag of contradictory signals—one in favor of and one against work—so that one can then state nothing of a categorical nature regarding the effects of taxation on production, and the question of whether or not taxation provides for a lower or a higher output of valuable assets must be conceived of as an entirely empirical one.[^8] For in fact, the signal of taxation is not contradictory at all once it has been recognized that it is being sent to persons whose actions are invariably constrained by time preference. For such actors there exists not only the alternative between work and no work at all but also one between producing a valuable asset in more or less time-consuming ways. Invariably, they must also choose between obtaining an asset quickly and directly, with little waiting time involved, but at the price of having to resort to less efficient methods of production (the famous fisherman who decides to use his bare hands to catch fish in order to obtain it more quickly than by going through more roundabout methods of production), or obtaining it through more productive methods but then having to wait longer for them to bear fruit (the fisherman who, lured by higher future returns, decides to endure a longer waiting period and first builds a net). However, given these choices, the message of taxation is completely unambiguous and unequivocal, and there can no longer be any question that the substitution effect must be thought of as systematically dominating any income effect: If there is not only the option of having something or not having it but also of having less of something sooner or more of it later, the double message sent through taxation is easily integrated and translated into one: reduce the waiting time; shorten the roundabout methods of production! By doing so, valuable assets will be obtained earlier—in line with their increased marginal utility. Simultaneously, in shortening the waiting period, more room will be given for leisure—in line with its increased marginal utility. By reducing the length of roundabout methods of production the two seemingly contradictory signals stemming from taxation are simultaneously accounted for. Contrary to any claim of a systematically “neutral” effect of taxation on production, the consequence of any such shortening of roundabout methods of production is a lower output produced. The price that invariably must be paid for taxation, and for every increase in taxation, is a coercively lowered productivity that in turn reduces the standard of living in terms of valuable assets provided for future consumption. Every act of taxation necessarily exerts a push away from more highly capitalized, more productive production processes in the direction of a hand-to-mouth-existence.

[^1]: Exclusively descriptive analyses of taxation are given, for instance, by Paul Samuelson, *Economics*, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), chap. 9; Roger L. Miller, *Economics Today*, 6th ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), chap. 6.

[^2]: Jean Baptiste Say, *A Treatise on Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1964), pp. 446–47.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 446; on Say’s economic analysis of taxation see also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (Fall, 1981), esp. pp. 551–54.

[^4]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), chap. 12.8; idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 4, 1–3.

[^5]: See Say, A Treatise on Political Economy, p. 448.

[^6]: See on this point also Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 95f.

[^7]: One might object here that the tax receipts will come into someone’s hands—those of government officials or of governmental transfer-paymentrecipients—and that their increased income, resulting in a lower effective time preference rate for them, may offset the increase in this rate on the taxpayers’ side and hence leave the overall rate and the structure of production unchanged. Such reasoning, however, is categorically flawed: For one thing, insofar as government expenditure is concerned, it cannot be regarded as investment at all. Rather, it is consumption, and consumption alone. For, as Rothbard has explained,

> [i]n any sort of division-of-labor economy, capital goods are built, not for their own sake by the investor, but in order to use them to produce lower-order and eventually consumers’ goods. In short, a characteristic of an investment expenditure is that the good in question is not being used to fulfill the needs of the investor, but of someone else—the consumer. Yet, when government confiscates resources from the private market economy, it is precisely defying the wishes of the consumers; when government invests in any good, it does so to serve the whims of government officials, not the desires of consumers. (*Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 816–17)

Thus, government expenditure, by definition, cannot be conceived of as lengthening the production structure and hence as counterbalancing the taxpayers’ raised time preference rate.—On the other hand,

> as for the *transfer* expenditures made by the government (including the salaries of bureaucrats and subsidies to privileged groups), it is true that some of this will be saved and invested. These investments, however, will not represent the voluntary desires of consumers, but rather investments in fields of production *not* desired by the *producing* consumers…. Once let the tax be eliminated, and … the new investments called forth by the demands of the specially privileged will turn out to be *malinvestments*. (*Power and Market*, p. 98)

Consequently, transfer expenditures also cannot be conceived of as compensating for the fact that taxpayers shorten the length of the production structure. All such expenditures can do is to lengthen the structure of mal-production. “At any rate” concludes Rothbard,

> the amount consumed by the government insures that the effect of income taxation will be to raise time-preference ratios and to reduce saving and investment. (Ibid., p. 98)

[^8]: See for such—irrelevant—empirical studies regarding the relative importance of income vs. substitution effects George F. Break, “The Incidence and Economic Effects of Taxation,” in *The Economics of Public Finance* (Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1974), pp. 180ff.; A.B. Atkinson and Joseph E. Stiglitz, *Lectures on Public Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1980), pp. 48ff.; Stiglitz, *Economics of the Public Sector* (New York: Norton, 1986), p. 372.