Não é difícil ilustrar a validade destas conclusões, se considerarmos o caso demasiado familiar de tributar ativos de dinheiro. Tais ativos somente são adquiridos e mantidos porque eles podem comprar outros ativos valiosos em datas futuras. Eles não têm de todo um valor próprio de uso intrínseco (como no caso de dinheiro papel de fiat), ou tal valor de uso é insignificante em comparação com o valor de troca (como no caso do padrão de ouro, onde o dinheiro também tem um — embora pequeno — valor da mercadoria). Em vez disso, o valor atribuído a eles é devido ao seu futuro poder de compra. No entanto, se o valor do dinheiro consiste em representar outros ativos disponíveis no futuro, os efeitos da tributação do dinheiro ficam imediatamente claros. Mais importante ainda, juntamente com o aumento da utilidade marginal do lazer ou do consumo, esse imposto aumenta a utilidade marginal desses ativos futuros. Essa mudança na constelação de incentivos se traduz em si por um ator em maiores tentativas de obter esses ativos mais rapidamente, em processos de produção menos demorados. Os únicos processos de produção que agora são sistematicamente mais baixos do que aqueles de alcançar ativos futuros indiretamente, através da aquisição mais cedo de dinheiro, são aqueles de adquiri-los através de trocas diretas. Assim, a tributação implica que o comércio de trocas, será substituído cada vez mais pelo método de produção de rotunda indireta mais longa de trocas monetárias. Mas mais uma vez, recorrer cada vez mais às trocas é uma regressão ao primitivismo económico e à barbárie. Foi precisamente porque a produção para fins de troca produziu um rendimento extremamente baixo que a humanidade realmente superasse esse estágio de desenvolvimento e, em vez disso, recorreu e expandiu cada vez mais um sistema de produção de troca indireta que, ao exigir um período mais longo de espera, porporciona um retorno muito maior de mais e diferentes ativos atraídos para o cash nexus. Todo ato de tributação significa um passo para trás forçado neste processo. Ele reduz a produção, diminui a extensão da divisão do trabalho e leva a uma redução na integração social e económica (o que se pode notar é que nunca poderia ter se tornado mundial, se não fosse para ainstituição de intercâmbios monetários indiretos).

Além disso a tendência geral é adotar cada vez mais os mecanismos de troca direta em vez de dos mecanismos de troca indirectos, causados por cada apreensão coerciva de dinheiro mas que também tem consequências altamente importantes em relação aos métodos de obtenção de dinheiro em si. Assim como no caso de ativos não monetários, o aumento da utilidade marginal do dinheiro em conjunto com o consumo de lazer torna ainda mais atraente a aquisição de dinheiro de formas menos demoradas. Em vez de adquiri-lo como troca de esforços de produção de valor, ou seja, no âmbito de intercâmbios mutuamente benéficos, a tributação aumenta o incentivo para adquiri-lo mais rápido e diretamente, sem ter que passar por métodos de rotunda tão aborrecidos como a produção e a contratação. Por um lado, isso significa que um tentará aumentar os ativos monetários com mais frequência, simplesmente escondendo-os do coletor de impostos. Por outro lado, surgirá uma tendência crescente para entrar na posse de dinheiro através de apreensão coerciva, na forma ilegal chamada de roubar, ou legalmente, participando no jogo chamado política.[^9]

Tendo completado essa análise económica geral dos efeitos da tributação, que os autores de livros económicos do dia de hoje geralmente preferem não ter que lidar com isso tudo, deixe-me agora voltar para o que normalmente dizem sobre os efeitos da tributação sob o título de incidência de impostos. À luz de nossa anterior análise, será fácil detectar a falha fatal em tais contas. Na verdade, esse deve cair precipitadamente em erro ao lidar com detalhes se ninguém ainda se preocupou em estudar o básico, dificilmente pode surgir como uma completa surpresa.

A conta padrão do problema da incidência de impostos mais frequentemente exemplificada pelo caso de um imposto especial de consumo ou imposto de vendas é assim:[^10] Suponha um imposto especial de consumo ou imposto sobre vendas seja imposto. Quem deve ficar com o ônus disso? É reconhecido - e é claro que não tenho a intenção de contestar a validade disso - que num certo sentido não há dúvida de que os consumidores devem assumir o peso e fazer invariavelmente. Quaisquer que sejam as consequências específicas de tal imposto, deve ser o caso de os consumidores terem de pagar um preço mais elevado pelos mesmos produtos e os seus padrões de vida serão prejudicados por isso, ou deve ser o caso que o imposto impõe custos mais altos aos produtores, e os consumidores serão punidos por causa de uma menor produção produzida. No entanto, e é com isso que teremos que discordar fortemente, argumenta-se então se a imposição de um imposto prejudica ou não os consumidores em primeiro caso ou em último caso é uma questão empírica aberta, cuja resposta depende da elasticidade da procura pelos produtos tributados. Se a procura não for suficientemente elástica, então os produtores irão mudar o fardo inteiro para os consumidores na forma de preços mais elevados. If it is highly elastic, then producers will have to absorb the tax in the form of higher costs of production, and if some section of the demand curve is inelastic and another elastic (this allegedly being empirically the most frequent case), then the burden somehow will have to be shared, with part of it being shifted onto consumers and another falling on producers.

What is wrong with this sort of argument? While it is couched in terms different from those used in my earlier analysis, one can hardly fail to notice that it merely restates, on a somewhat more specific level of discussion, what has already been demonstrated as false on a more general level: the thesis that taxes may or may not reduce productive output; that there is no necessary connection between taxes and productive output; and that it must be considered empirically possible that a tax may affect consumption exclusively while production remains untouched. To assume, as the textbook-account of taxincidence does, that taxes can be shifted forward, either totally or partially, onto consumers is simply to say that a tax may not negatively affect production. For if it were possible to shift any amount of a tax forward onto consumers, that amount would represent a “nonproduction tax,” a tax exclusively on consumption.[^11]

In order to refute the typical textbook analysis, one could simply go back to our previous discussion that resulted in the conclusion that any tax imposed on people constrained by time preference must negatively affect production above and beyond any negative consequences that it implies for consumption. However, I will choose a somewhat different route of argument here in order to make essentially the same point and thereby establish the more specific thesis that no amount of any tax can be shifted onto consumers. To assume otherwise is to assume something manifestly impossible.

The absurdity of the tax-forward-shifting doctrine becomes clear as soon as one tries to apply it to the case of a single actor who continuously acts in both roles—that of a producer and a consumer. For such a producer-consumer, the doctrine amounts to this proposition: If he is faced with an increase in the costs of attaining some future good—an increase, that is, that he himself perceives as a cost-increasing event—then he shifts these higher costs onto himself in such a way that he responds by attaching a correspondingly higher value to the good to be obtained, thereby restoring his old profit-margin, thus leaving his role as producer unchanged and unimpaired, and requiring restrictive adjustments exclusively in his role as a consumer. Or, formulated even more drastically, insofar as his value-productive efforts are concerned, a tax does not make any difference for an individual, because he just starts liking the to-be-produced good correspondingly more.

Plain reasoning reveals that what generates such absurdity is a fundamental conceptual confusion: The forward-shifting doctrine arises from not recognizing that in one’s analysis one must assume that demand is given—and that this must be assumed because it in fact is given at any point in time. Any analysis that loses track of this is flawed, for if one were to assume that demand had changed, then everything would be possible: production might increase, decrease, or remain unchanged. If I am a producer of tea and tea is taxed and if it is assumed that the demand schedule for tea rises concurrently, then, naturally, it is possible that people are now willing to pay a higher price for tea than previously. Yet this is obviously not a forward shifting of the tax but the result of a change in demand. To present this possibility under the heading of tax-incidence analysis is plain nonsense: it is in fact an analysis of the entirely different question of how prices are affected by changes in demand and has nothing whatsoever to do with the effects of taxation. The confusion here is on as grand a scale as that which one would encounter if someone were to “refute” the statement that one apple and another make two by saying “No, I have just added another apple, and look, there are not two but three apples here.” It is hard to get away with such nonsense in math; in economics a doctrine hardly less absurd is the orthodoxy.

Yet if one is logically committed to assuming demand to be given whenever one tries to answer the question whether or not a tax can be shifted forward, every tax must be interpreted as an event that exclusively affects the supply side: it reduces the supplies at the disposal of suppliers.[^12] Any other conclusion would amount to a denial of what had been assumed from the outset—that a tax had indeed been imposed and perceived as such by producers. To say that only the supply curve is shifted whenever a tax is extracted (while the demand curve remains the same as before) is to say nothing else than that the entire tax-burden must in fact be absorbed by the suppliers. To be sure, the leftward shift of the supply curve would cause prices to rise and consumers would naturally be harmed by having to pay these higher prices and by only being able to afford a smaller amount of goods at such a price.[^13] Yet that consumers will invariably be hurt by taxes has of course never been doubted as one should recall. However, it is a misconception to think that this higher price is a shifting of the tax burden from producers to consumers. Rather, consumers are hurt here “only” by harm being done to producers who, despite higher prices charged for their supplies, must bear the brunt.[^14] One must ask oneself why, if an entrepreneur could indeed shift any amount of the tax-burden away from himself and onto consumers, he would not have already done so by voluntarily imposing a tax on himself instead of waiting for the actual coercive tax to come along! The answer is clear: At all times he is constrained in his price-setting activity by the actual given demand. The price set by any entrepreneur is set with the expectation that a price higher than the one actually chosen would yield a lower total revenue. Otherwise, if he expected a higher price to bring about a larger revenue he would raise it. As long as an entrepreneur expects the demand to be inelastic within the region of any price-range under consideration, he will take advantage of this and choose the higher price. He stops raising prices and settles for a specific one because his expectations are reversed and he anticipates the demand curve above this price to be elastic. These expectations regarding inelastic and elastic portions of the demand curve are not at all changed if the entrepreneur is faced with a tax. Then as now he expects higher prices to produce revenue losses. Thus, it is obviously out of the question to argue that he could escape the burden of the tax. In fact, if as a consequence of the reduced supply the price now rises, this upward movement must be into an elastic portion of the demand curve, and the entrepreneur thus must assumedly pay the full price of it in the form of reduced revenue. Any other conclusion is logically flawed. Only if the entrepreneur expects a change in demand occurring simultaneously with taxation could he change his price without thereby incurring losses. If he expects demand to have increased, for instance, such that there will now be an inelastic rather than an elastic stretch of the demand curve above the presently going price, he will be able to raise it without punishment. Again, this is not a forward shifting of the tax. This is increased demand. With or without the tax the entrepreneur would have acted in precisely the same way. The tax has nothing to do with such price changes. In any case, the tax must be paid exclusively and in full by the suppliers of the taxed goods.[^15]

[^9]: Here once again what has already been explained in a somewhat different connection in note 7 above becomes evident: why it is a fundamental mistake to think that taxation might have a “neutral” effect on production such that any “negative” effects on tax*payers* may be compensated by corresponding “positive” effects on tax *spenders*. What is overlooked in this sort of reasoning is that the introduction of taxation not only implies favoring nonproducers at the expense of producers. It simultaneously changes, for producers and nonproducers alike, the cost attached to different methods of attaining an income, for it is then relatively less costly to attain an additional income through nonproductive means, i.e., not through actually producing more goods but by participating in the process of noncontractual acquisitions of already produced goods. If such a different incentive structure is applied to a given population, then the length of the production structure will necessarily be shortened, and a decrease in the output of goods produced must result. See on this also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989), chap. 4.

[^10]: See for instance William Baumol and Alan Blinder, *Economics: Principles and Policy* (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979), pp. 636ff.; Daniel R. Fusfeld, *Economics: Principles of Political Economy,* 3rd ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1987), pp. 639ff.; Robert Ekelund and Robert Tollison, *Microeconomics*, 2nd ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1988), pp. 463ff. and 469f.; Stanley Fisher, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Richard Schmalensee, *Microeconomics*, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1988), pp. 385f.

[^11]: On the impossibility of a pure consumption tax see also Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 108ff.

[^12]: Baumol and Blinder, *Economics: Principles and Policy*, p. 636, present the *demand* curve as changing in response to a tax.

[^13]: To avoid any misunderstanding then: Insofar as the textbook analyses of tax-incidence point out this fact they are of course entirely correct. It is the interpretation of this phenomenon they give which is fundamentally confused!

[^14]: See on this point also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, p. 809.

[^15]: Should a tax not immediately affect supply at all, as can happen in the short run, then it follows from the above analysis that the price charged will not change at all. For to raise it in response to the tax would once again imply pushing it into an elastic region of the demand curve. In the long run the supply will have to be relatively reduced and prices must move into this region. In any case, no forward shifting takes place. See on this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 807ff.; idem, *Power and Market*, pp. 88ff.