#### Il Processo Capitalista

Un simile verdetto trova ancora più sostegno quando la teoria di Keynes sul processo capitalista viene finalmente considerata. Che Keynes non sia amico del capitalismo e dei capitalisti dovrebbe essere ovvio dalle citazioni di cui sopra. Infatti, sostenendo "una socializzazione degli investimenti", si mette in luce apertamente come socialista. [^67] Per Keynes, il capitalismo * significa * crisi.

Egli identifica essenzialmente due ragioni per questo, la prima, a cui Keynes attribuisce la natura ciclica del processo capitalista, è già stata toccata. Sicuramente, fintanto che il corso dell'economia è in gran parte determinato da capitalisti che, come abbiamo sentito, "sono in gran parte ignoranti di ciò che stanno acquistando", e che cospirano "per mantenere le cose scarse", non può essere un corso liscio e neanche uno solo. Dipendendo soprattutto dalle persone che basano le loro decisioni sulla loro "digestione ed ll'andamento meteo", il processo capitalista deve essere inaffidabile. Mosso dal "crescere e calare" dell'ottimismo imprenditoriale e del pessimismo, che a sua volta è determinato dalla "psicologia incontrollabile e disobbediente del mondo degli affari", i cicli boom-bust sono inevitabili. Cicli business — quindi il messaggio centrale del capitolo 22 della * Teoria generale * di Keynes, le "Note sul Ciclo Commerciale" — sono fenomeni determinati * psicologicamente *. Questo è sicuramente errato. Una spiegazione psicologica del ciclo economico è rigorosamente impossibile, e considerarla come una spiegazione implica un errore di categoria: i cicli economici sono ovviamente eventi reali, vissuti da individui, ma vissuti da essi come accadimenti al di fuori di essi nel mondo dei beni reali e della ricchezza reale. Credenze, sentimenti, aspettative, ottimismo e pessimismo dall'altra parte sono fenomeni * psicologici *. Si può pensare ad un fenomeno psicologico che influenza o influenza un altro, ma è impossibile pensare che un fenomeno psicologico abbia un impatto diretto sui risultati nel mondo esterno delle cose e dei beni reali. Solo attraverso * azioni * può essere influenzato il corso degli eventi reali; ed ogni spiegazione del ciclo economico deve quindi essere necessariamente * prasseologica * (al contrario di quella psicologica). La teoria del ciclo economico psicologico di Keynes in effetti * non può spiegare che tutto ciò che è reale accade *. Tuttavia, poiché le cose reali sono fatte per accadere, le persone devono agire e allocare e riallocare le risorse scarse a obiettivi stimati. Non si può agire arbitrariamente, tuttavia, come avrebbe fatto Keynes, perché nell'agire uno è invariabilmente vincolato da una reale scarsità che non può essere influenzata dalla nostra psicologia. Né Keynes spiega con la sua teoria perché gli sbalzi d'umore imprenditoriali porterebbero a qualsiasi * particolare * andamento delle fluttuazioni commerciali — come il ciclo boom-bust, che egli presumibilmente vorrebbe spiegare — invece di qualsiasi altro possibile schema di fluttuazioni.


La seconda ragione dell'instabilità del capitalismo e la desirabilità di una soluzione socialista, secondo Keynes, sono le tendenze intrinseche stagnazioniste del capitalismo. La sua teoria della stagnazione si incentra sulla nozione che prende da Hobson e Mummery, ed approva, "che nel normale stato delle moderne comunità industriali, il consumo limita la produzione e non la produzione il consumo." [^68] Con questo come uno dei suoi assiomi solo le sciocchezze possono seguire.

La stagnazione è dovuta ad una mancanza di consumo. "Fino al punto in cui prevale la piena occupazione", scrive, "la crescita del capitale non dipende affatto da una bassa propensione al consumo, ma al contrario è frenata da esso". [^69] In combinazione con la sua tesi  sottoconsumistica c'è una "legge psicologica fondamentale, sulla quale abbiamo il diritto di dipendere con grande fiducia sia a priori dalla nostra conoscenza della natura umana e dai fatti dettagliati dell'esperienza, che gli uomini sono disposti, di norma ed in media, ad aumentare il loro consumo al crescere del loro reddito, ma non tanto quanto l'aumento del loro reddito. "[^70] "Come norma ... una maggiore percentuale di reddito [sarà] risparmiata nel momento cui il reddito reale aumenta. "[^71]

Di per sé, questa seconda legge, che qui viene accettata come plausibile per amor di argomentazione (tranne che per aggiungere che il consumo, naturalmente, non può mai scendere a zero), non sembra indicare alcun problema. E allora? Se i risparmi aumentano in modo esponenziale con i redditi crescenti, tanto meglio per il prodotto sociale. [^72] Ma Keynes, nel suo modo di pensare logico e spensierato, unisce questa legge alla tesi che la produzione è limitata dal consumo, e non ha allora alcuna difficoltà a provare qualsiasi cosa egli desideri.

If consumption limits production, and if nonconsumption rises with rising incomes, then it indeed seems to follow that increasing incomes imply their own undoing by increasing nonconsumption, which in turn limits production, etc. And if this is so, it also seems to follow that wealthier societies, which non-consume more, should be plagued particularly hard by this “stagnitis”; and that in any given society it should be the rich, who nonconsume more, who contribute most to economic stagnation (except for the “minor” problem that one cannot explain, according to this theory, why individuals or societies could be wealthier than others in the first place!). In any case, Keynes accepts these conclusions as true.[^73] Accordingly, he presents his recommendations on how to get out of stagnation. In addition to a “comprehensive socialization of investment,” Keynes suggests measures to stimulate consumption, in particular an income redistribution from the rich (people with a low propensity to consume) to the poor (those with a high propensity to consume).

> Whilst aiming at a socially controlled rate of investment with a view to a progressive decline in the marginal efficiency of capital I should support at the same time all sorts of policies for increasing the propensity to consume. For it is unlikely that full employment can be maintained, whatever we may do about investment, with the existing propensity to consume. There is room, therefore, for both policies to operate together;—to promote investment and, at the same time, to promote consumption, not merely to the level which with the existing propensity to consume would correspond to the increased investment, but to a higher level still.[^74]

How is such a thing as simultaneously promoting investment and consumption in order to increase income conceivably possible? In fact, Keynes gives us his own formal definitions of the terms involved: “income = consumption + investment; saving = income - consumption; therefore, saving = investment.”[^75] Under these definitions, a simultaneous increase in consumption and investment out of a given income is conceptually impossible!

Keynes is not terribly disturbed over “details” such as these. In order to get what he wants, he simply shifts, completely unnoted, the meanings of his terms. He drops the just quoted formal definitions, which would render such a result impossible, and he adopts a new meaning for the term saving. Instead of unconsumed income, saving quietly comes to mean hoarding (i.e., the act of not-spending money on *either* consumer *or* capital goods).[^76] Thereby the results can be easily made to come out right. For then savings are no longer equal to investment; and saving, being defined as the act of *not*-spending, automatically acquires a negative connotation, while investment and consumption take on a positive one. Moreover, now one must almost naturally be worried about savings exceeding investment, or so it seems, for this would seem to imply that something is leaking out of the economy, and that income (defined as investment + consumption) must be somehow reduced. Keynes certainly worries about this possibility. He calls it “a chronic tendency throughout human history for the propensity to save to be stronger than the inducement to invest.”[^77] And this chronic tendency must surely be particularly pronounced if incomes are high, for then, as we have been told, savings reach a particularly high proportion of income. But do not despair. Where something can leak out, something also can leak in. If savings is unspent money, then savings can be brought into existence, simple enough, by means of governmental money creation, so as to compensate for the outward leakage which tends to increase with increasing incomes. There is the danger, of course, that these compensatory “community savings” immediately leak out again by being added to the private sector’s cash hoardings (because, according to Keynes, the newly created savings would lower the interest rate, and this in turn would increase the capitalists’ liquidity preference so as to counteract such a tendency and to artificially “keep capital scarce”). But this can be taken care of by the “socialization of investment” as we know, and by some Gesellian stamped money schemes (“The idea behind stamped money is sound”).[^78] And once saving and investing is done publicly—through the agency of the State, as Keynes would say—and all money is spent, and no keep-things-scarce motive is in the way any longer, there is indeed no longer any problem with increasing consumption and investment simultaneously. Since savings is unspent money, and newly created money and credit is just as genuine as any other because it is not “forced” on anyone, savings can be created by the stroke of a pen.[^79] And since the State, contrary to the scarcity-exploiting capitalists, can make sure that these additional genuine savings are indeed being spent (instead of wandering into hoards), any increase in the supply of money and credit through governmental counterfeiting increases consumption and investment at the same time and so promotes income twice. Permanent inflation is Keynes’s cure-all. It helps overcome stagnation; and more of it overcomes the more severe stagnation crises of the more advanced societies. And once stagnation is defeated, still more inflation will abolish scarcity within one generation.[^80]

Yet the wonders do not cease. What is this leakage, this surplus of savings over investment, that constitutes all such dangers? Something must leak from somewhere to someplace else, and it must play some role here and some there. Keynes tries to disperse such thoughts by asking us once again not to apply logic to economics. “Contemporary thought,” he writes, “is still deeply steeped in the notion that if people do not spend their money in one way they will spend it in another.”[^81] It would seem hard to imagine how this contemporary thought could possibly be wrong, but Keynes believes it false. For him there exists a third alternative. Something, an economic good one would think, simply drops out of existence, and this means trouble.

> An act of individual saving means—so to speak—a decision not to have dinner to-day. But it does *not* necessitate a decision to have dinner or buy a pair of boots a week hence or a year hence or to consume any specified thing at any specified date. Thus it depresses the business of preparing to-day’s dinner without stimulating the business of making ready for some future act of consumption. It is not a substitution of future consumption-demand for present consumption-demand—it is a net *diminution* of such demand.[^82]

Still, the strictures of a two-valued logic do not quite crumble yet. How can there be any net diminution of something? What is not spent on consumer goods or capital goods must still be spent on something else—namely on cash. *This exhausts all possibilities*. Income and wealth can be and must be allocated to consumption, investment, or cash. Keynes’s diminution, the leakage, the excess of savings over investment, is income spent on, or added to, cash hoardings. But such an increase in the demand for cash has no effect on income, consumption, and investment whatever, as has already been explained. With the social money stock being given, a general increase in the demand for cash can only be brought about by bidding down the money prices of nonmoney goods. But so what?[^83] Nominal income (i.e., income in terms of money) will fall; but real income and the real consumption-investment proportion will be entirely unchanged. And people along the way get what they want: an increase in the real value of their cash balances, and of the purchasing power of the money unit. There is nothing stagnating here, or draining, or leaking, and Keynes has offered *no theory of stagnation at all* (and with this, of course, also no theory of how to get out of stagnation). He merely has given a perfectly normal phenomenon such as falling prices (caused by an increased demand for money, or by an expanding productive economy) a bad name in calling it stagnation, or depression, or the result of a lacking effective demand, so as to find just another excuse for his own inflationary schemes.[^84]

Here we have Keynes in his entire greatness: the twentieth century’s most famous “economist.” Out of false theories of employment, money, and interest, he has distilled a fantastically wrong theory of capitalism and of a socialist paradise erected out of paper money.

[^67]: Keynes’s socialism, however, is not the egalitarian-proletarian version as espoused by the Bolsheviks. For this Keynes has nothing but contempt. His socialism is of the fascist or Nazi variety. In the preface to the German edition of his *General Theory* (which appeared in late 1936) he wrote:

::::> The theory of aggregate production that is the goal of the following book can be much more easily applied to the conditions of a totalitarian state than the theory of the production and distribution of a given output turned out under the conditions of free competition and of a considerable degree of *laissez-faire*. (quoted from Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* p. 277)

[^68]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 368\. On the Keynesian theory of stagnation see also Alvin H. Hanson, *Fiscal Policy and Business Cycles* (New York: Norton, 1941); for a critique see George Terborgh, *The Bogey of Economic Maturity* (Chicago: Machinery and Allied Products Institute, 1945); also Murray N. Rothbard, “Breaking Out of the Walrasian Box: The Cases of Schumpeter and Hansen,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 1 (1987).

[^69]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 372–73.

[^70]: Ibid., p. 96.

[^71]: Ibid., p. 97; also pp. 27f.

[^72]: In fact, Keynes informs us that *savings is by definition identical to investment* (p. 63), “that the excess of income over consumption, which we call saving, cannot differ from the addition to capital equipment which we call investment” (p. 64). Then, however, a reduced proportion of consumption expenditures must by definition go hand in hand with accordingly increased investments, and this would lead to a higher future income, to still more absolute consumption and still more absolute and relative saving and investment. Where, indeed, is the problem here?

[^73]: Keynes writes,

::::> If in a potentially wealthy community the inducement to invest is weak, then, in spite of its potential wealth, the working of the principle of effective demand will compel it to reduce its actual output, until, in spite of its potential wealth, it has become so poor that its surplus over its consumption is sufficiently diminished to correspond to the weakness of the inducement to invest. (*The General Theory*, p. 31)

::::Or:

::::> The greater, moreover, the consumption for which we have provided in advance, the more difficult it is to find something further to provide for in advance, and the greater our dependence on present consumption as a source of demand. Yet the larger our incomes, the greater, unfortunately, is the margin between our incomes and our consumption. So, failing some novel expedient, there is, as we shall see, no answer to the riddle, except that there must be sufficient unemployment to keep us so poor that our consumption falls short of our income by no more than the equivalent of the physical provision for future consumption which it pays to produce to-day. (p. 105)

[^74]: Ibid., p. 325; or “the remedy would lie in various measures designed to increase the propensity to consume by the redistribution of incomes or otherwise” (p. 324).

[^75]: Ibid., p. 63\. It is typical of Keynes’s philosophy of abundance that he gets things upside down here as well. For the correct definitions are: product produced = income; income - consumption = saving; saving = investment. Where does Keynes’s income come from?

[^76]: See on this also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* pp. 120–23.

[^77]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 347.

[^78]: Ibid., p. 357.

[^79]: See on this note 51.

[^80]: On his program of permanent inflation see also this remark on the trade cycle: “The right remedy for the trade cycle is not to be found in abolishing booms and keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom” (p. 322). The answer to credit expansion, that is, is still more credit expansion.

[^81]: Ibid., p. 20.

[^82]: Ibid., p. 210; second emphasis added.

[^83]: Contrary to Keynes’s fanciful fears, the demand for money can never be infinite, because everyone must obviously consume sometimes (and cannot delay consumption further); and at such points liquidity preference is definitely finite.

[^84]: The second element of Keynes’s stagnation theory is equally false. It may be that that saving in the definition of equaling investment increases overproportionally with increasing incomes—while it can never reach 100 percent. Yet this situation certainly should give no one concern regarding the social income produced. It is, however, *not* true that savings in the sense of hoarding increases with increasing incomes, and that the greatest leakage then occurs among the rich and in wealthy societies. The opposite is true. If real income increases because the economy, supported by additional savings, is expanding, the purchasing power of money increases (the money stock being given). But at a higher purchasing power of the money unit, the amount of cash demanded actually falls (the demand for money schedule being given). Thus, if anything, the leakstagnation nonproblem should actually diminish rather than increase with increasing wealth.
