#### Interesse

Il denaro è "neutrale" anche verso gli interessi. Tuttavia, l'interesse, a differenza del denaro, è prasseologicamente correlato all'occupazione e al prodotto sociale.

Dato che il denaro è il risultato dell'incertezza, l'interesse deriva dalle preferenze temporali, che è cosi essenziale all'azione come l'incertezza (ed in un certo senso come sarà spiegato a breve anche di più). Nell'agire, un attore non solo cerca invariabilmente di sostituire uno stato di cose meno soddisfacente con uno più soddisfacente dimostrando così una preferenza per più piuttosto che meno beni; ma deve anche considerare invariabilmente quando nel futuro i suoi obiettivi saranno raggiunti (cioè il tempo necessario per realizzarli) e la durata della funzionalità di un bene, e quindi ogni azione dimostrerà anche una preferenza universale per i beni nuovi rispetto a quelli precedenti e per quelli più durevoli rispetto a quelli meno durevoli. Ogni azione richiede un po 'di tempo per raggiungere il suo obiettivo; poiché l'uomo deve consumare qualcosa a volte e non può smettere di consumare interamente, il tempo è sempre scarso. Quindi, * ceteris paribus *, i beni presenti o precedenti sono, e devono essere invariabilmente, valutati più di quelli futuri o successivi. [^11] Infatti, se l'uomo non fosse vincolato dalle preferenze temporali e l'unico vincolo operativo fosse quello di preferire di più in rispetto al meno, egli avrebbe invariabilmente scelto quei processi produttivi che avrebbero prodotto la maggiore produzione per input, a prescindere dal periodo di tempo necessario affinché questi metodi portassero i loro frutti. Ad esempio, invece di costruire una rete da pesca, Crusoe inizierebbe immediatamente a costruire un peschereccio, il metodo economicamente più efficiente per la cattura del pesce. Che nessuno, compreso Crusoe, agisca in questo modo rende evidente che l'uomo non può che "valutare frazioni di tempo della stessa lunghezza in un modo diverso, in quanto sono più vicini o più lontani dall'istante della decisione dell'attore." [^12]

Quindi, vincolato dalle preferenze temporali, l'uomo scambierà un bene presente con uno futuro solo se anticipa un aumento così della sua quantità di beni futuri. Il tasso di preferenza temporale, che può essere diverso da persona a persona e da un punto all'altro nel tempo, ma che non può mai essere altro che positivo per tutti, determina simultaneamente l'altezza del premio che i beni presenti commandano rispetto a quelli futuri come così come la quantità di risparmi ed investimenti. Il tasso di interesse di mercato è la somma aggregata di tutti i singoli tassi di preferenza temporale, riflettendo, per così dire, il tasso sociale delle preferenze temporali e l'equilibrio tra risparmio sociale (cioè offerta di beni attuali offerti per lo scambio con beni futuri) ed investimento sociale (vale a dire, la domanda di beni presenti in grado di produrre rendimenti futuri).

Nessuna fornitura di fondi mutuabili potrebbe esistere senza precedenti risparmi, cioè senza l'astensione da un possibile consumo di beni presenti. Inoltre, non esisterebbe alcuna richiesta di fondi mutuabili se nessuno percepisse alcuna opportunità di impiegare i beni presenti in modo produttivo (cioè, per investirli in modo da produrre una quantità futura che supererebbe l'input attuale). Infatti, se tutti i beni presenti fossero consumati e nessuno investisse in processi di produzione che impiegano tempo, non ci sarebbe alcun interesse o tasso di preferenza temporale, o piuttosto, il tasso di interesse sarebbe infinitamente alto, che al di fuori del Giardino dell'Eden sarebbe equivalente di vivere una primitiva sussistenza vivendo incontrando la realtà con nient'altro che le proprie mani nude e con nient'altro che un desiderio di gratificazione istantanea.

L'offerta e la domanda di fondi mutuabili emergono solo — e questa è la condizione umana — una volta riconosciuto che i processi di produzione indiretti, più rotondi, più lunghi possono produrre un output maggiore o migliore per input rispetto a quelli diretti e brevi; [^13] ed è possibile, mediante il risparmio, accumulare la quantità di beni presenti necessari per soddisfare tutti quei desideri la cui soddisfazione durante il lungo tempo di attesa è ritenuta più urgente dell'incremento del futuro benessere previsto dall'adozione di un più lungo processo di produzione. [^14]

Finché questo è il caso, la formazione e l'accumulo di capitale veranno impostati e continueranno. Instead of being supported by and engaged in instantaneously gratifying production processes, the originary factors of production, land and labor, are supported by an excess of production over consumption and employed in the production of capital goods. These have no value except as intermediate products in the process of turning out final (consumer) goods. In other words, their value lies in the fact that whoever possesses them can use them to produce other capital goods more efficiently. The excess in value (price) of a capital good over the sum expended on the complementary originary factors required for its production is due to this time difference and the universal fact of time preference. It is the price paid for buying time; for moving closer to the completion of one’s ultimate goal rather than having to start at the very beginning. Because of time preference, the value of the final output must exceed the sum spent on its factors of production (the price paid for the capital good and all complementary labor services).

The lower the time preference rate, then, the earlier the process of capital formation will set in, and the faster it will lengthen the roundabout structure of production. Any increase in the accumulation of capital goods and in the roundaboutness of the production structure in turn raises the marginal productivity of labor. This leads to either increased employment and/or wage rates, and, in any case (even if the labor supply curve should become backward sloping with increased wages), to a higher wage total.[^15] Supplied with an increased amount of capital goods then, a better paid population of wage earners will produce an overall increased—future—social product, raising at last, after that of the employees, also the real incomes of the owners of capital and land. While interest (time preference) thus has a direct praxeological relation to employment and social income, it has nothing whatsoever to do with money. To be sure, in a money economy there also exists a monetary expression for the social rate of time preference. Yet this does not change the fact that interest and money are systematically independent and unrelated, and interest is a “real,” not a monetary phenomenon. In fact, in the never-never land of equilibrium there would be no place for money because the future by definition would be certain and with all uncertainty removed no one would have any need for cash holdings (whose sole purpose it is, cash being neither productive nor consumable, to have one prepared for not yet known purchases at not yet known dates). Time preference and interest, however, cannot be conceived of as disappearing even then. For even in equilibrium the existing capital structure needs to be constantly maintained over time (so as to prevent it from gradually becoming consumed in the even course of an endlessly repeated pattern of productive operations). There can be no such maintenance, however, without ongoing savings and reinvestments: and there can be no such things as these without the expectation of a positive rate of interest. (Indeed, if the rate of interest paid were zero, capital consumption would result, and one would move out of equilibrium.)[^16]

Matters become somewhat more complex under conditions of uncertainty, with money actually in use, but the praxeological independence of money and interest remains fully intact. Under these conditions, man invariably has three instead of two alternatives as to how to allocate his current income. He must not only decide how much to allocate to the purchase of present goods and how much to future goods (i.e., how much to consume and how much to invest), but also how much to keep in cash. There are no other alternatives. Yet while man must at all times make adjustments concerning three margins at once, invariably the outcome is determined by two distinct and praxeologically unrelated factors. The consumption/investment proportion is determined by time preference. The source of the demand for cash, on the other hand, is the utility attached to money (i.e., its usefulness in allowing immediate purchases of directly serviceable goods at uncertain future dates). Both factors can vary, independent of one another.

If the supply of money changes, or if the demand for money changes with a given social stock of money, the purchasing power of money will also change. However, aside from causing changes in relative incomes, no such changes in a money unit’s purchasing power would have any effect on overall real income. Incomes in terms of money increase or decrease, yet the purchasing power of money correspondingly falls or rises, leaving real income unchanged. Or, with money incomes unchanged, more or less of it will be held in cash (hoarded), but then the purchasing power of money correspondingly rises or falls, once again leaving the real income purchased with a smaller or larger sum of money unaltered. It is this real income, however, not money as such, to which a man’s time preference schedule is related, and in light of which his effective rate of time preference is determined. Since real income does not change through all these monetary changes, there is no reason to suppose that the rate of time preference will. If, for instance, the Keynesian nightmare of increased hoarding becomes reality and prices generally fall while the purchasing power of money correspondingly rises, this will leave the real investment/consumption proportion entirely unaffected. Unless the time preference schedule is assumed to have changed at the same time, the additional hoards will be drawn from funds that formerly were spent on consumption and from funds that formerly went into investment in the same pre-established proportion, so as to leave real consumption and real investment at precisely their old levels. However, if time-preference is assumed to change concomitantly, then everything is possible. Indeed, if the additional hoards come exclusively from previous consumption spending, an increased demand for money can go hand in hand even with a fall in the rate of interest and increased investment. Yet this is due not to changes in the demand for money but exclusively to a change (a fall) in the time preference schedule.[^17]

#### The Capitalist Process

With the division of labor established and extended to its ultimate limit via the development of a universal medium of exchange, the process of economic development is essentially determined by time preference.

To be sure, there are other factors that are important: the quality and quantity of the population, the endowment with nature-given resources, and the state of technology. Yet of these, the quality of a people is largely beyond anyone’s control and must be taken as a given: the quantity of a population may or may not advance economic development, depending on whether the population is below or above its optimum size for a given-sized territory: and nature-given resources or technological know-how can only have an economic impact if discovered and utilized. To do this, though, there must be prior savings and investment. It is not the availability of resources and technical or scientific knowledge that imposes limits on economic advancement: rather, it is time preference that imposes limits on the exploitation of actually available resources as well as on the utilization of existing knowledge (and also on scientific progress for that matter, insofar as research activities, too, must be supported by saved-up funds).

Thus, the only viable path toward economic growth is through savings and investment, governed as they are by time preference. Ultimately there is no way toward prosperity except through an increase in the per capita quota of invested capital. This is the only way to increase the marginal productivity of labor and only if this is done can future income rise in turn. With real incomes rising, the effective rate of time preference falls (without, however, ever reaching zero or even becoming negative), adding still further increased doses of investment, and setting in motion an upward spiraling process of economic development.

There is no reason to suppose that this process should come to a halt short of reaching the Garden of Eden where all scarcity has disappeared—unless people deliberately choose otherwise and begin to value additional leisure more highly than any further increase in real incomes. Nor is there any reason to suppose that the process of capitalist development would be anything but smooth and that the economy would flexibly adjust not only to all monetary changes but to all changes in the social rate of time preference as well. Of course, so long as the future is uncertain, there will be entrepreneurial errors, losses, and bankruptcies. But no systematic reason exists why this should cause more than temporary disruptions, or why these disruptions should exceed, or drastically fluctuate around, a “natural rate” of business failures.[^18]

Matters become different only if an extra-market institution such as government is introduced. It not only makes involuntary unemployment possible, as explained above: the very existence of an agency that can effectively claim ownership over resources which it has neither homesteaded, produced, nor contractually acquired, also raises the social rate of time preference for homesteaders, producers, and contractors, and hence creates involuntary impoverishment, stagnation, or even regression. It is only through government that mankind can be stopped on its natural course toward a gradual emancipation from scarcity long before ever reaching the point of a voluntarily chosen zero-growth.[^19] And it is in the presence alone of a government, that the capitalist process can possibly take on a cyclical (rather than a smooth) pattern, with busts following booms. Exempt from the rules of private property acquisition and transfer, government naturally desires a monopoly over money and banking and wants nothing better than to engage in fractional reserve (deposit) banking—in nontechnical terms: monopolistic counterfeiting—so as to enrich itself at the expense of others through the much less conspicuous means of fraud rather than through outright confiscation.[^20] Boom and bust cycles are the outcome of fraudulent fractional reserve banking. If and insofar as the newly created counterfeit money enters the economy as additional supplies on the credit market, the rate of interest will have to fall below what it otherwise would have been. Credit must become cheaper. Yet at a lower price more credit is taken, and more resources then are invested in the production of future goods (instead of being used for present consumption) than otherwise would have been. The roundaboutness of the entire production structure is lengthened. In order to complete all investment projects that now are underway, more time is needed than that required to complete those begun before the credit expansion. All the goods which would have been created without credit expansion must be produced; plus those that are newly added. For this to be possible, however, more capital is required. The larger amount of future goods can only be produced successfully if additional savings provide for a fund of means of sustenance sufficiently large to bridge, and carry workers through, the longer waiting time. But, by assumption, no such increase in savings has taken place. The lower interest rate is not the result of a larger supply of capital goods. The social rate of time preference has not changed at all. It is solely the result of counterfeit money entering the economy through the credit market. It follows logically that it must be considered impossible to successfully complete all investment projects underway after a credit expansion due to a systematic lack of real capital. Projects will have to be liquidated so as to shorten the overall production structure and to readjust it to an unchanged rate of social time preference and the corresponding real investment-consumption proportion.[^21]

These cyclical movements can neither be avoided by expecting them (according to the motto “a cycle anticipated is a cycle avoided”): They are the praxeologically necessary consequence of additional counterfeit credit being successfully placed. Once this is the case, a boom-bust cycle is inevitable, regardless of what actors correctly or incorrectly believe or expect. The cycle is induced by a monetary change, but it takes effect in the realm of “real” phenomena and will be a “real” cycle no matter what beliefs people happen to hold.[^22]

Nor can it be realistically expected that the inevitable cyclical movements resulting from an expansion of credit will ever come to a halt: So long as an extra-market institution like government is in control of money, a permanent series of cyclical movements will mark the process of economic development. For through the creation of fraudulent credit, a government can engender a smooth and highly inconspicuous income and wealth redistribution in its own favor. There is no reason (short of angelic assumptions) to suppose that it would ever deliberately stop using this magic wand merely because credit expansion has the “unfortunate” side-effect of business cycles.

[^11]: On the time preference theory of interest see William Stanley Jevons, *Theory of Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1965); Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, *Capital and Interest*, 3 vols. (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1959); Richard von Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion* (Vienna: Julius Springer, 1934 [Engl. trans., Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988]); Frank Fetter, *Capital, Interest, and Rent* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1971); Roger Garrison, “In Defense of the Misesian Theory of Interest,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979); idem, “Professor Rothbard and the Theory of Interest,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^12]: Mises, *Human Action,* p. 483.

[^13]: To be sure, not all lengthier production processes are more productive than shorter ones; but under the assumption that man, constrained by time-preference, will invariably and at all times select the shortest conceivable methods of producing some given output, any increase in output then can—praxeologically—only be achieved if the production structure is lengthened.

[^14]: Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 490ff.

[^15]: See also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 663f.

[^16]: See also Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 530–32; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 385–86.

[^17]: See also Murray N. Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975), pp. 39–41.

[^18]: See also Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 12–17.

[^19]: On the role of government as destructive of wealth formation, see in particular Murray N. Rothbard, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989); idem, “The Economics of Sociology and Taxation,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* (1990); supra chap. 2.

[^20]: See in particular Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking*; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Banking, Nation States, and International Politics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 4 (1990); supra chap. 3; idem, “Marxist and Austrian Class Analysis,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 9, no. 2 (1990); supra chap. 4; idem, “European Economic Integration and the ECU,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (1989).

[^21]: On the theory of the business cycle see Mises’s original contribution in his *Theory of Money and Credit*, part III, chap. 5; his first elaborate version is *Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik* (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928), the English translation of which did not appear until 1978 in Ludwig von Mises, *On the Manipulation of Money and Credit* (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Free Market Books, 1978); F.A. Hayek, *Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle* (New York: A.M. Kelley, 1966); idem, *Prices and Production* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1967); Hayek’s works were first published in 1929, resp. l93l; it is interesting to note that Hayek, who received the Nobel prize in 1974, the year after Mises’s death, for his contributions to the Mises-Hayek theory of the business cycle, obviously misrepresents Mises’s achievements as regards the development of this theory: In his *Prices and Production* of 1931, the first presentation of the Austrian business cycle theory to appear in English, he acknowledges Mises’s prior claim to fame. Yet even though he cites Mises’s above mentioned 1928 work, he falsely claims that Mises’s contributions to the theory were essentially confined to a few remarks in his original work of 1912; see chap. 3 fn. 1 in *Prices and Production*; Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion*; Lionel Robbins, *The Great Depression* (Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1971); Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*; Ludwig von Mises, et al., *The Austrian Theory of the Trade Cycle and Other Essays* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1983); Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung*, chap. 3; Roger Garrison, “Hayekian Trade Cycle Theory: A Reappraisal,” *Cato Journal* 6, no. 2 (1986); idem, “The Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle in the Light of Modern Macroeconomics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1988).

[^22]: See also Roger Garrison, “‘Rational Expectations’ Offers Nothing That’s Both New and True,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* 6, no. 1 (1985); idem, “The Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle in Light of Modern Macroeconomics” esp. pp. 19–23. See also the critique of psychological—as opposed to praxeological—business cycle theories below.
