Mana nkwupụta nke ngwaahịa ọha akwụsịghị ike, ọ bụghị sọ maka nzipụta atụmuche na ekwesịghị ekwesị. Gụnyeere ma echiche ekọnọmị nke kwesịrị ịrụ ọrụ nke ọma e binyere n'ime arụmụka a dị njọ nke ukwu. Dịka nkwupụta nke ngwaahịa ọha si wee kwụ, ọ nwere ike ịka mma ma ọ bụrụ na e nwee ngwaahịa ọha karịa na enweghị ha, a gbanyere na e kwesịghị ka a chezọọ na ọ nweghị nkwupụta okwu ọnụ dịnụ nke sị na aga enwerịrị ha (nke a ga-abịa kwụsị atụmuche ndị nkwupụta ngwaahịa ọha ozigbo). Maka na o doro anya na ọ ga-ekwe omume, ma bụrụ ihe a maara na ọ bụ eziokwu, na ọ nwere ndị n'eti ogbaaghara ihe steeti anaghị amasị ma ọlị, nke na ọ ga aka masị ha na kama steeti G emepụta ngwaahịa ọha kama ka a ghara ịnwe ha chaa chaa.[^16]Ka o sila dị, ma ọ bụrụ na ha emerie na arụmuka a, ị si na nkwupụta ha na ngwaahịa ọha bụ ihe mmasị wee banye na nkwupụta na n'ihi nke ahụ na steeti kwesịrị ịmepụta ha abụghị ezi mkpebi ma ọlị, n'ihi na ọ nweghị ka o si wee bụrụ nhọrọ a chere anyị n'ihu ugbua. Ebe ọ bụ na aga esepụ ego ma ọ bụ ngwa ọrụ ndị ọzọ site n'ihe ọrụ ndị ọzọ e ji n'aka, iji wee kwado ihe ndị a kpọrọ ngwaahịa ọha, sọ otu ajụjụ kwesịrị ekwesị bụ ma ọrụ ndị ọzọ a e ji n'aka nke e kwesịrị itinye ego na ha (ya bụ, ngwaahịa nke onwe ndị a kaara ịzụ mana ugbua agaghị enwe ike ịzụ ha n'ihi na ana atụnye ego a n'ịmepụta ngwaahịa ọha) a ka wee ba uru -a chọrọ ha ngwa ngwa - karịa ngwaahịa ọha. Azịza ajụjụ a dọrọ anya nke ọma. A bia na nyocha ndị n'azụ ahịa, etu ọ sọrọ ya ka o si wee garaa ọnụ, ọnụ ahịa ngwaahịa ọha na aka adị ọnụ ala karịa nke ngwaahịa nkeonwe ya na ya na-asọmpi, n'ihi na a hapụ ndị n'azụ ahịa ka ha họrọ (hara ị chebe ha ihe ọzọ n'ihu), o doro anya na ọ ga-amasị ha iri ego ha n'ụzọ ọzọ (ya bụ na ọ gaghị adị mkpa ịche ha ihe ọzọ n'ihu ma ha a chọrọ ma ha achọghị). Nke a bụ iji gosipụta n'enweghị mgbagha ọbụla na ngwa ọrụ e ji wee mepụta ngwaahịa ọha bụ mmefu ka e mefuru ha, n'ihi na ha n'enye ndị na azụ ahịa ngwaahịa na arụmọrụ n'adịghị oké mkpa. Ma a sị kwube, ọ bụrụ na mmadụ e chee na e nwere ngwaahịa ọha aga enwe ike iziputa na o nweghị njikọ dịịrị ya na ngwaahịa nkeonwe, ọ sọ ya ka ọ bụrụ na ya bụ ngwaahịa ọha nwere ike ịba uru, ngwaahịa ọha na nkeonwe ga na-asọrịrị mpi. Nakwa ọ bụ sọ otu ụzọ ka aga eji wee chọpụta ma a chọrọ ha ngwa ngwa, ma na oke a chọrọ ha, ma oke mepụta ha ga esi wee metụta adịghị mmepụta maọbụ etu ọ ga-esi nwetuo mmepụta ngwaahịa nkeonwe ndị a chọrọ ngwa ngwa: site n'ịme ka ụlọ ahịa nkeonwe ndị na asọmpi bụrụ ndị ga enweta ihe a ga-eji emepụta ha. Ya mere, na ịgbaso mkpebi nke ndị nkwupụta ngwaahịa ọha ruru, atụmuche ga eme ka mmadụ kweta na ọ bụ sọ ụlọ ahịa na-eso usoro dịka ahịa kwụụrụ onwe ya ga enwe ike ịchekwa ezi uche, dịka nke ndị ndị na-azụ ahịa na-eche, ka emepụta ngwaahịa ọha. Ma ọ bụ sọ n'ọchịchị onyeketeorie ka aga enwe ike ịhụ na mkpebi gbasara oke ngwaahịa ọha aga emepụta (ma ọ bụrụ na aga emepụta ya ma ọlị) ga-eso ezi usoro. 2Ọ peketa mpe, ọ ga abụ site na mgbanwe nke usoro Orwell ka aga enwe ike inweta nsonaazu dị iche. Ma ọ bụrụ na mmadụ nwere mmasị ịkọwa "mba" onye ọzọ kwuru dịka "ee", kọwaa "achọghị ịzụ ihe ọbụla" dịka "ihe onye na achọghị ịzụ ya bụ ahịa na-eme," kọwaa "aka ike" dịka "nwere onwe," kọwaa "enweghị nkwekọrịta" dịka "inwe nkwekọrịta" dgz., ka aga enwe ike ịgosipụta nkwupụta ndị nkwupụta ngwaahịa ọha n'uju.3 Mana kedụ etu anyị ga-esi mara na ihe ha kọwara bụ ihe ha bu n'obi mgbe ha kwuru ihe ha kwuru, na ọ bụghị ihe ọzọ ka ha n'ezipụta, ma ọ bụ n'onweghị ihe ha bu n'obi ma ọlị, na ha na-ekwugharị ọnụ? Anyị agaghị enwe ike ị ma. Ya bụ na Murray N. Rothbard kwuru eziokwu mgbe ọ kwuru maka mgbalị nkwupụta nke ngwaahịa ọha nke na-achọ igosipụta ọdịdị ihe ha kpọrọ ọdịda ahịa n'ihi na emepụtaghị ngwaahịa ọha ma ọ bụ na emepụtaghị ha n'ụdị adịm mma maọbu n'uju etu o si kwesị. Ọ dere sị,

Na ụdị uche nke sayensị akụnụba a na-ekwu sị na omume nke ahịa kwụụrụ onwe ya ziri ezi oge ọbụla. O ziri ezi, ọ bụghị site na etu onye ọkacha mara nke akụnụba si ele ya anya, mana ọ bụ site na etu ndị niile na atụnye maọbụ na-eketa oke na ya si ele ya anya, nakwa site n'imejupụta mkpa ndị na-azụrụ ya bụ ahịa. Gọọmenti itinye aka na ya, ga eme ka ọ si n'usoro kwesịrị ekwesị wee pụọ. [^19]

N'ezie, ịrụ ụka ndị e nwere ike ịsị na ha na-egosipụta na ọdịda ahịa bụ ihe n'ezighị ezi. E wepụ mkpụrụokwu ndị ha ji agbawoju mmadụ anya, sọ ihe ịrụ ụka ha ga-egosi bụ: Ahịa ezughị ezu n'isi onwe ya, n'ihi na ọ bụ ụkpụrụ nke "enweghị mmekpa" ọbụla nke sitere na ọnọdụ ụkọ zipụtara, ya mere na ụfọdụ ngwaahịa maọbụ ọrụ e nwere ike ịmepụta maọbụ weta, ma ọ bụrụ na e kwe ka mmekpa maọbụ aka ike dị, agaghị abụ ihe aga emepụta. Nke a bụ eziokwu, mana ọ nweghị onye nkwupụta ahịa ga enwe ike ịgọnahụ nke a. [^20] Ma sị kwube, ihe a doro anya, "ezughị ezu" nke ụlọ ahia ga-abụ ihe aga enwe ike ị kwuuru, site n'akụkụ ihe onye kwesịrị ime nakwa n'akụkụ nke akụnụba, mana "izu ezu" nke ụlọ ahịa nke ndị nkwupụta ngwaahịa ọha na ekwu maka ya enweghị etu a ga-esi e kwuuru ya. Ọ bụkwa eziokwu na ịkwụsị steeti ka ha ghara ị mepụta ngwaahịa ọha ga agbanwe ọtụtụ usoro ndị mmadụ si ebi ndụ nakwa etu akụnụba si agbasa n'obodo. Ụdị mgbanwe a ga-abụ mbido ịta ahụhụ nyere ụfọdụ ndị. Na-ikwu eziokwu, ọ bụ ihe kpatara e ji nwee ọtụtụ ndị n'ime ọhaneze ji agbaso iwu ndị chọrọ ka a gbanwee ọtụtụ ihe steeti ka ọ bụrụ nkeonwe, a gbanyere na n'ọdịnihu nchịkọta akụnụba ọha mmadụ ga-abụ nke iwu a ga-akwalite. Mana n'ezie, eziokwu a abụghị nke aga anabata na arụmụka iji gosi ọdịda nke ahịa. Ọ bụrụ na ahapụ otu nwoke ka ọ na-akụ ndị mmadụ ihe n'isi mana ugbua adịghị ekwe ya ka ọ kụọ mmadụ ihe, ọ ga-ewute ya. Mana mmadụ agaghị eji nwute ọ nwere ugbua dịka ihe aga eji wee sị na iwu nyere ya ohere ka ọ na-akụ mmadụ ihe bụ iwu kwesịrị ekwesị. Ọ metụtara ya n'ụzọ na amasịghị ya, mana nke a pụtara na aga eji usoro ụzọ wee nọchie iwu ahụ, ebe onye ọbụla ga-enwe ikike ha nha anya iji wee kpebie ihe maọbụ okè ihe ọbụla e kwesịrị ịmepụta, nọchie usoro nke n'enye ụfọdụ ndị ikike ikwu etu ndị ọzọ ekwesịghị iji ego dị ha n'aka ka ha kpara n'ụzọ kwesịrị ekwesị wee zụrụ ihe ha chọrọ, etu ha si chọọ maọbụ mgbe ha chọrọ. N'ezie, ụdị nnọchi a ga-aka mma site n'ile ya anya n'ụdị ọnọdụ ndị niile na-azụ ahịa dịka ndị n'azụ ahịa etu nakwa mgbe ha chọrọ. 

Site n'ike aka nke atụmuche, anyị ga-ekwenye na mkpebi nke Molinari na maka ọdịmma onye ọbụla n'azụ ahịa, ngwaahịa nakwa arụmọrụ niile ga-abụ nke ụlọ ahịa ga-eweta.[^21] Ọ bụ okwu ụgha na e nwere ngwaahịa ndị e nwere ike ịkewepụta iche ka ha nọdụrụ onwe ha, ọ bụrụ n'ụdị ngwaahịa a dị ha ga eme ka ọ dị oke mkpa na aga agbanwe mkpesa nke na-ekwu na ọgbakọ obodo onyeketeorie kacha mma ma abịa n'ihe gbasara akụnụba; ọ bụrụ na ha dị n'ezie, ọ nweghị ihe aga enwe ike ikwu iji wee sị na ndị ụlọ ahịa nkeonwe agaghị enwe ike ịmepụta ha, ebe ọ bụ na ha ga-eso ngwaahịa nkeonwe wee na-asọ mpi. Ma asị kwube, a gbanyere mkpu niile ndị nkwupụta ngwaahịa ọha na-eti, mmawanye nke ịdị mma ahịa ma a tụnyeere ya na steeti na amawanye kwa mgbe n'ihi ngwaahịa ọha ndị a ha na-ekwu maka ya. N'ihi ahụmahụ chere onye ọbụla n'ihu kwa ụbọchị, ọ ga-esi ike tupu onye ọbụla na eleba okwu a anya agọnahụ na ugbua ụlọ ahịa na emepụta ọrụ nzipu ozi, okporo ụzọ ụgbọigwe, ọkụ eletrik, ekwentị, agụmakwụkwọ, ego, okporo ụzọ na ihe ndị ọzọ nke ọma karịa ndị nke steeti na emepụta, ya bụ, na ndị mmadụ ka wee we mmasị na nke ha. Ma ndị mmadụ anaghị ekwenye n'ihe echiche chọrọ ka ha kwenye n'otu mpaghara: na ịmepụta nchekwa. Ya bụ na, maka oke fọdụrụ na nkeji akwụkwọ a aga m eleba anya na-akọwa ọkịka usoro akụnụba onyeketeorie si arụ ọrụ na mpaghara a - ọkịka nke e megoro ka onye ọbụla ghọta ugbua, mana nke a ga-eme ka ọ daa ụda ma ọ bụrụ na e tinye ụfọdụ ihe ndị enwere ike inyocha na nyocha ya bịa lebaa anya na ya dịka nsogbu n'isi onwe ya. [^22]

Kedu etu usoro asọmpi ndị na-emepụta nchekwa ga-adị? Ọ ga-edo anya site na mbụ na site n'ịza ajụjụ a mmadụ na-esi na mpaghara ụdị nyocha gbadoro ụkwụ n'echiche mmadụ wee pụọ ya bụ na ọsịsa ya agaghị abụ nke doro anya, nkea bụ ụdị omume nke a na-atụnyere nkwupụta ndị e ji akwalite nkwupụta ngwaahịa ọha. Nsogbu chere n'ihu bụ ụdị aga eji tụnyeere ajụjụ na-ajụ etu a ga-esi wee gboo nsogbu nke mmepụta hambọga, ọ kachasị ma ọ bụrụ na ma ruo ugbua na ọ bụ sọ steeti na emepụta ya nke ga-eme ka ọ ghara inwe onye ga agbado ụkwụ n'ihe mere n'oge mbụ. Ọ bụ sọ ọsịsa na-edoghi anya ka a ga-enye. Agaghị enwe ike ịhụ onye ọbụla ga-ama nke ọma usoro ụlọ ọrụ na emepụta hambọga ji arụ ọrụ - ụlọ ọrụ ole na-asọ mpi ga ebido, uru ụlọ ọrụ ndị a ga-enwe karịa ndị ọzọ, ihe hambọga ga-adị ka ya, ụdịri hambọga ole ka aga ahụ n'ahịa maọbụ ndị ga-apụ n'ahịa maka na o nweghị onye chọrọ ha, dgz. Onweghi onye ga-ama ọnọdụ nakwa mgbanwe niile ga emetụta usoro ụlọ ọrụ hambọga ji arụ ọrụ - mgbanwe dị na ụdị ndị na achọ ya, mgbanwe dị na ọgbara, mgbanwe dị na ọnụ ahịa ngwaahịa ndị ga emetụta ụlọ ọrụ hambọga kpọmkwem maọbụ n'ụzọ ọzọ, dgz. A ga-eme ka ọ doo anya na agbanyere na nsogbu ndị ọzọ yitere nke mmepụta nkeonwe nke nchekwa na-adapụta, nkea apụtaghị na o nweghị ihe doro anya e nwere ikwu. A sị ka e lebaa anya n'ụfọdụ ọnọdụ niile gbasara ọchịchọ arụmọrụ nchekwa (ọnọdụ ndị na-egosipụta ụwa ka ọ dị ugbua) ihe e nwere ike ikwu nakwa ihe a ga-ekwu bụ kedụ etu usoro mmepụta nchekwa nke gbasara ọha mmadụ, ndị nke njirimara ha bụ ụdị nrụgide dị iche iche ndị nke ha kwesịrị ịrụ ọrụ n'okpuru ha, ga-esi wee zaghachi n'ụzọ dị iche iche. [^23] Ka m bụrụ ụzọ nyochaa ihe niile gbasara nchekwa ọ bụ sọ naanị steeti na-emepụta, ọ bụrụ sọ naanị n'ụdị ọnọdụ a mmadụ ga enwe ike ịsepụta ọtụtụ ihe ngosi gbasara ebe mkpebi e ruru kwụ nakwa bịa tụnyeere ya na usoro a site n'ihe a tụrụ anya ma ọ bụrụ na e nwere usoro onye ọbụla ga-enwe ike isonye wee nọchie ya.

Even if security is considered to be a public good, in the allocation of scarce resources it must compete with other goods. What is spent on security can no longer be spent on other goods that also might increase consumer satisfaction. Moreover, security is not a single, homogeneous good, but rather consists of numerous components and aspects. There is not only prevention of crime, detection of criminals, and enforcement of the law, but there is also security from robbers, rapists, polluters, natural disasters, and so on. Moreover, security is not produced in a “lump,” but can be supplied in marginal units. In addition, different people attach different importance to security as a whole, and also to different aspects of the whole thing, depending on their personal characteristics, their past experiences with various factors of insecurity, and the time and place in which they happen to live.[^24] Here I address the fundamental economic problem of allocating scarce resources to competing uses, how can the state—an organization not financed exclusively by voluntary contributions and the sales of its products but rather partially or even wholly by taxes—decide how much security to produce, how much of each of its countless aspects, to whom and where to provide how much of what? The answer is that it has no rational way to decide this question. From the point of view of the consumers, its response to their security demands must be considered arbitrary. Do we need one policeman and one judge, or 100,000 of each? Should they be paid $100 a month or $10,000? Should the policemen, however many we might have, spend more time patrolling the streets, chasing robbers, and recovering stolen loot, or spying on participants in victimless crimes such as prostitution, drug use, or smuggling? And should the judges spend more time and energy hearing divorce cases, traffic violations, cases of shoplifting, and murder, or antitrust cases? Clearly, all of these questions must be answered somehow because as long as there is scarcity and we do not live in the Garden of Eden, the time and money spent on one thing cannot be spent on another. The state must answer these questions, too, but whatever it does, it does it without being subject to the profit-and-loss criterion. Hence, its action is arbitrary and necessarily involves countless wasteful misallocations from the consumer’s viewpoint.[^25] Independent to a large degree of consumer wants, the state-employed security producers instead do what they like. They hang around instead of doing anything, and if they do work they prefer doing what is easiest or work where they can wield power rather than serving consumers. Police officers drive around a lot, hassle petty traffic violators, spend huge amounts of money investigating victimless crimes that many people (i.e., nonparticipants) do not like but that few would be willing to spend their money on to fight, as they are not immediately affected by them. Yet with respect to what consumers want most urgently—the prevention of hardcore crime (i.e., crimes with victims), the apprehension and effective punishment of hard-core criminals, the recovery of loot, and the securement of compensation of victims of crimes from the aggressors—the police are notoriously inefficient, in spite of ever higher budget allocations.

Furthermore, whatever state-employed police or judges happen to do (arbitrary as it must be), they will tend to do poorly because their income is more or less independent of the consumer’s evaluations of their services. Thus one observes police arbitrariness and brutality and the slowness in the judicial process. Moreover, it is remarkable that neither the police nor the judicial system offers consumers anything even faintly resembling a service contract in which it is laid down in unambiguous terms what procedure the consumer can expect to be set in motion in a specific situation. Rather, both operate in a contractual void that over time allows them to change their rules of procedure arbitrarily and that explains the truly ridiculous fact that the settlement of disputes between police and judges on the one hand and private citizens on the other is not assigned to an independent third party, but to another policeman or judge who shares employers with one party—the government—in the dispute.

[^16]: See on this argument Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” p. 533\. Incidentally, the existence of one single anarchist also invalidates all references to Pareto optimality as a criterion for economically legitimate state action.

[^17]: Essentially the same reasoning that leads one to reject the socialist-statist theory built on the allegedly unique character of public goods as defined by the criterion of nonexcludability, also applies when, instead, such goods are defined by means of the criterion of nonrivalrous consumption (see notes 6 and 12 above). For one thing, in order to derive the normative statement that they *should* be so offered from the statement of fact that goods that allow nonrivalrous consumption *would not* be offered on the free market to as many consumers as could be, this theory would face exactly the same problem of requiring a justifiable ethics. Moreover, the utilitarian reasoning is blatantly wrong, too. To reason, as the public goods theorists do, that the free-market practice of excluding free riders from the enjoyment of goods that would permit nonrivalrous consumption at zero marginal costs would indicate a suboptimal level of social welfare and hence would require compensatory state action is faulty on two related counts. First, cost is a subjective category and can never be objectively measured by any outside observer. Hence, to say that additional free riders could be admitted at no cost is totally inadmissible. In fact, if the subjective costs of admitting more consumers at no charge were indeed zero, the private owner-producer of the good in question would do so. If he does not do so, this reveals that the costs for him are *not* zero. The reason may be his belief that to do so would reduce the satisfaction available to the other consumers and so would tend to depress the price for his product; or it may simply be his dislike for uninvited free riders as, for instance, when I object to the proposal that I turn over my less-thancapacity-filled living room to various self-inviting guests for nonrivalrous consumption. In any case, since for whatever reason the cost cannot be assumed to be zero, it is then fallacious to speak of a market failure when certain goods are not handed out free of charge. On the other hand, welfare losses would indeed become unavoidable if one accepted the public goods theorists’ recommendation of letting goods that allegedly allow for nonrivalrous consumption to be provided free of charge by the state. Besides the insurmountable task of determining what fulfills this criterion, the state, independent of voluntary consumer purchases as it is, would first off face the equally insoluble problem of rationally determining *how much* of the public good to provide. Clearly, since even public goods are not free goods but are subject to “crowding” at some level of use, there is no stopping point for the state, because at any level of supply there would still be users who would have to be excluded and who, with a larger supply, could enjoy a free ride. But even if this problem could be solved miraculously, in any case the (necessarily inflated) cost of production and operation of the public goods distributed free of charge for nonrivalrous consumption would have to be paid for by taxes. And this then, i.e., the fact that consumers would have been coerced into enjoying their free rides, again proves beyond any doubt that these public goods, too, are of inferior value from the point of view of consumers to the competing private goods that they now no longer can acquire.

[^18]: The most prominent modern champions of Orwellian double talk are Buchanan and Tullock (see their works cited in note 3 above). They claim that government is founded by a “constitutional contract” in which everyone “conceptually agrees” to submit to the coercive powers of government with the understanding that everyone else is subject to it too. Hence government is only *seemingly* coercive but *really* voluntary. There are several evident objections to this curious argument. First, there is no empirical evidence whatsoever for the contention that any constitution has ever been voluntarily accepted by everyone concerned. Worse, the very idea of all people voluntarily coercing themselves is simply inconceivable, much in the same way as it is inconceivable to deny the law of contradiction. For if the voluntarily accepted coercion is voluntary, then it would have to be possible to revoke one’s subjection to the constitution, and the state would be no more than a voluntarily joined club. If, however, one does not have the “right to ignore the state”—and that one does not have this right is, of course, the characteristic mark of a state as compared to a club—then it would be logically inadmissible to claim that one’s acceptance of state coercion is voluntary. Furthermore, even if all this were possible, the constitutional contact could still not claim to bind anyone except the original signers of the constitution.

::::How can Buchanan and Tullock come up with such absurd ideas? By a semantic trick. What was “inconceivable” and “no agreement” in pre-Orwellian talk is for them “conceptually possible” and a “conceptual agreement.” For a most instructive short exercise in this sort of reasoning in leaps and bounds, see James Buchanan, “A Contractarian Perspective on Anarchy,” in idem, *Freedom in Constitutional Contract* (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1977). Here we learn (p. l7) that even the acceptance of the 55 mph speed limit is possibly voluntary (Buchanan is not quite sure) since it ultimately rests on all of us conceptually agreeing on the constitution, and that Buchanan is not really a statist, but in truth an anarchist (p. 11).

[^19]: Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, p. 887.

[^20]: This, first of all, should be kept in mind whenever one has to assess the validity of statist-interventionist arguments such as the following, by John Maynard Keynes (“The End of Laissez Faire,” in idem, *Collected Writings*, London: Macmillan, 1972, vol. IX, p. 291):

::::> The most important Agenda of the state relates not to those activities which private individuals are already fulfilling but to those functions which fall outside the sphere of the individual, to those decisions which are made by no one if the state does not make them. The important thing for government is not to do things which individuals are doing already and to do them a little better or a little worse: but to do those things which are not done at all.

::::This reasoning not only *appears* phony, it truly is.

[^21]: Some libertarian minarchists object that the existence of a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of a common body of law, and hence a government as a monopolistic judge and enforcement agency. (See, for example, John Hospers, *Libertarianism* [Los Angeles: Nash, 1971]; Tibor Machan, *Human Rights and Human Liberties* [Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1975].) Now it is certainly correct that a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of those rules that underlie its operation. But from this it does not follow that this task must be entrusted to a monopolistic agency. In fact, a common language or sign-system is also presupposed by the market; but one would hardly think it convincing to conclude that hence the government must ensure the observance of the rules of language. Like the system of language, then, the rules of market behavior emerge spontaneously and can be enforced by the “invisible hand” of self-interest. Without the observance of common rules of speech, people could not reap the advantages that communication offers, and without the observance of common rules of conduct, people could not enjoy the benefits of the higher productivity of an exchange economy based on the division of labor. In addition, as I indicated above, independent of any government the nonaggression principle underlying the operation of markets can be defended a priori as just. Moreover, as I will argue in the conclusion of this chapter, it is precisely a competitive system of law-administration and law-enforcement that generates the greatest possible pressure to elaborate and enact rules of conduct that incorporate the highest degree of *consensus* conceivable. And of course the very rules that do just this are those that a priori reasoning establishes as the logically necessary presupposition of argumentation and argumentative agreement.

[^22]: Incidentally, the same logic that would force one to accept the idea of the production of security by private business as economically the best solution to the problem of consumer satisfaction also forces one, so far as moral-ideological positions are concerned, to abandon the political theory of classical liberalism and take the small but nevertheless decisive step (from there) to the theory of libertarianism, or private property anarchism. Classical liberalism, with Ludwig von Mises as its foremost representative in the twentieth century, advocates a social system based on the nonaggression principle. And this is also what libertarianism advocates. But classical liberalism then wants to have this principle enforced by a monopolistic agency (the government, the state)—an organization, that is, which is not exclusively dependent on voluntary, contractual support by the consumers of its respective services, but instead has the right to unilaterally determine its own income, i.e., the taxes to be imposed on consumers in order to do its job in the area of security production. Now, however plausible this might sound, it should be clear that it is inconsistent. Either the principle of nonaggression is valid, in which case the state as a privileged monopolist is immoral, or business built on and around aggression—the use of force and of noncontractual means of acquiring resources—is valid, in which case one must toss out the first theory. It is impossible to sustain both contentions and not to be inconsistent unless, of course, one could provide a principle that is more fundamental than both the nonaggression principle and the states’ right to aggressive violence and from which both, with the respective limitations regarding the domains in which they are valid, can be logically derived. However, liberalism never provided any such principle, nor will it ever be able to do so, since, to argue in favor of anything presupposes one’s right to be free of aggression. Given the fact then that the principle of nonaggression cannot be argumentatively contested as morally valid without implicitly acknowledging its validity, by force of logic one is committed to abandoning liberalism and accepting instead its more radical child: libertarianism, the philosophy of pure capitalism, which demands that the production of security be undertaken by private business too.

[^23]: On the problem of competitive security production, see Gustave de Molinari, *Production of Security*; Murray N. Rothbard, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 1; idem, *For A New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 12; W.C. Woolridge, *Uncle Sam the Monopoly Man* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1970), chaps. 5–6; Morris and Linda Tannehill, *The Market for Liberty* (New York: Laissez Faire Books, 1984), part 2.

[^24]: See Manfred Murck, *Soziologie der Öffentlichen Sicherheit* (Frankfurt: Campus, 1980).

[^25]: To say that the process of resource allocation becomes arbitrary in the absence of the effective functioning of the profit-loss criterion does not mean that the decisions that somehow have to he made are not subject to any kind of constraint and hence are pure whim. They are not, and any such decisions face certain constraints imposed on the decision maker. If, for instance, the allocation of production factors is decided democratically, then it evidently must appeal to the majority. But if a decision is constrained in this way or if it is made in any other way, it is still arbitrary from the point of view of voluntarily buying or not-buying consumers.

::::Regarding *democratically* controlled allocations, various deficiencies have become quite evident. As, for example, James Buchanan and Richard E. Wagner write (*The Consequences of Mr. Keynes* [London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1978], p. 19):

::::> Market competition is continuous; at each purchase, a buyer is able to select among competing sellers. Political competition is intermittent; a decision is binding generally for a fixed number of years. Market competition allows several competitors to survive simultaneously…. Political competition leads to an all-or-nothing outcome…. In market competition the buyer can be reasonably certain as to just what it is that he will receive from his purchase. In political competition, the buyer is in effect purchasing the services of an agent, whom he cannot bind…. Moreover, because a politician needs to secure the cooperation of a majority of politicians, the meaning of a vote for a politician is less clean than that of a “vote” for a private firm.

::::See also James M. Buchanan, “Individual Choice in Voting and the Market,” in idem, *Fiscal Theory and Political Economy* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1962); for a more general treatment of the problem Buchanan and Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent.*

::::What has commonly been overlooked, though—especially by those who try to make a virtue of the fact that a democracy gives equal voting power to everyone, whereas consumer sovereignty allows for unequal “votes”—is the most important deficiency of all: Under a system of consumer sovereignty people might cast unequal votes but, in any case, they exercise control exclusively over things that they acquired through original appropriation or contract and hence are forced to act morally. Under a democracy of production everyone is assumed to have something to say regarding things one did not so acquire; hence, one is permanently invited thereby not only to create legal instability with all its negative effects on the process of capital formation, but, moreover to act immorally. See on this also Ludwig von Mises, *Socialism* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1981), chap. 31.
