## Przedmowa do Pierwszego Wydania

Upadek socjalizmu we wschodniej Europie—uzewnętrzniony najbardziej dramatycznie w wydarzeniach na zawsze pamiętnego 9 listopada 1989, kiedy Niemcy wschodnie i zachodnie zjednoczyły się, poruszyły i uszczęśliwiły, na szczycie Muru Berlińskiego— dodał więcej wsparcia i nagłości do głównej tezy tej części niż się spodziewałem.

Whether the following studies deal with economic topics such as employment, interest, money, banking, business cycles, taxes, public goods, or growth; with philosophical problems as the foundations of knowledge, and of economics and ethics in particular; or the reconstruction and theoretical explanation of historical and sociological phenomena such as exploitation, the rise and fall of civilizations, international politics, war, imperialism, and the role of ideas and ideological movements in the course of social evolution—each ultimately contributes to but one conclusion: The right to private property is an indisputably valid, absolute principle of ethics and the basis for continuous “optimal” economic progress. To rise from the ruins of socialism and overcome the stagnation of the Western welfare states, nothing will suffice but the uncompromising privatization of all socialized, that is, government, property and the establishment of a contractual society based on the recognition of the absoluteness of private property rights.

In writing the following studies I received help from many sides. Special thanks go to my wife Margaret, who again took on the task of de-Germanizing my English; to Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., president of the Ludwig von Mises Institute, and to Burton S. Blumert, president of the Center for Libertarian Studies, for their continuing support of my work; and to my friend David Gordon, for his numerous invaluable suggestions and comments.

Mój największy dług jest do Ludwiga Von Mises i Murray'a N. Rothbard'a, dwóch największych choć niedocenianych ekonomistów i filozofów społecznych dwudziestego wieku. While I never met Ludwig von Mises, and indeed had not heard of his name until after his death, I am fortunate to have been closely associated with Murray Rothbard for the past six years, first in New York City, and since 1986 as colleagues at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Apart from the intellectual debt that I owe him, words cannot express my personal gratitude. His wisdom, insight, kindness, enthusiasm, and unflagging encouragement have been a continuous inspiration to me. It is, therefore, to him that this volume is dedicated.

Hans-Hermann Hoppe

*Las Vegas, Nevada, 1993*