Second, the use of money substitutes instead of actual gold must be systematically encouraged and such a tendency backed up by the enactment of legal tender laws. The counterfeiting process thereby becomes much less costly. Instead of having to remint gold, only paper tickets must be printed.

However, the problem already discussed earlier remains. As long as a system of free banking is in operation, the counterfeit notes cannot be prevented from returning to the new issuer with the request for redemption, and he then cannot—at least not without a contractive adjustment—fulfill his obligations. Aby pokonać tę przeszkodę, w kolejnym kroku państwo musi zmonopolizować system bankowy lub zmusić konkurujące banki do kartelu pod kontrolą własnego banku centralnego obsługiwanego przez państwo. Once it is in command of a monopolized or cartelized banking system, the state can put the coordinated and joint counterfeiting process of the entire banking system into effect that avoids this risk.

W następnym kroku złoto musi zostać znacjonalizowane, tj. państwo musi wymagać od wszystkich banków deponowania złota w banku centralnym i prowadzenia działalności wyłącznie za pomocą substytutów pieniędzy zamiast złota. This way gold disappears from the market as an actually used medium of exchange and instead everyday transactions become increasingly characterized by the use of central banknotes.

Finally, gold being already out of sight and in the state’s sole possession, the state must cut the last tie to gold by reneging on its contractual obligations and declaring its notes irredeemable. Built on the ruins of gold, which as a commodity money standard initially made it possible that paper notes could actually acquire any purchasing power, a pure fiat money standard has been erected and can now be kept in operation, at long last handing the state the unlimited counterfeiting power that it had been vying for.

The goal of a complete counterfeiting autonomy likewise dictates the strategy that must be pursued on the psychological front. Obviously, in approaching its ultimate goal the state creates victims and thus it is also in need of favorable public opinion. Its rise to absolute counterfeiting power must be accompanied by redistributive measures that generate the support necessary to overcome all upcoming forces of resistance. It must look for allies.

Odnośnie stanu monopolizacji prawa i porządku, ruchu, komunikacji i edukacji oraz demokratyzacji jej struktury organizacyjnej—podczas gdy jasne jest, że wszystkie one są środkami redystrybucyjnymi i jako takie implikują faworyzowanie jednej osoby kosztem drugiej—trudno jest, jeśli nie niemożliwe, zidentyfikować osoby zyskujące ( lub przegrywające) z określonymi klasami społecznymi: w obrębie jednej klasy społecznej mogą być wygrani i przegrani; a schemat redystrybucji może z czasem ulec zmianie. In all of these cases the link between the state’s redistributive expenditures and their payoffs is only indirect: whether or not certain education expenditures, for instance, pay off in terms of increased state income will only become visible at a later date; and even then it will be difficult to attribute such an outcome to a definite cause. In the case of the monopolization of money and banking, on the other hand, who outside the apparatus of the state itself will be the benefactors of its redistributive policies and who the losers will be is clear at once; and sociologically the benefactors can easily be identified with a specific social class. In this case the connection between the state’s handing out redistributive favors and its own enrichment is direct and close-circuited; and the attribution of causes obvious: The state is compelled to make banks and the social class of bankers its accomplices by allowing them to participate in its counterfeiting operations and so enrich themselves along with the state’s own enrichment.

Bankers would be the first ones to become aware of the state’s attempts at counterfeiting. Without special incentives to the contrary they would have no reason to support such actions and every reason to uncover and stop them as quickly as possible. And the state would not run into just any opposition here: bankers, because of their exalted position in economic life and in particular because of their far-reaching interconnectedness as a professional group resulting from the nature of their business as facilitators of interspatial and intertemporal exchanges, would be the most formidable opposition one might encounter. The incentive necessary to turn such potential enemies into natural allies is the state’s offer to cut them in on its own fraudulent machinations. Familiar with the ideas of counterfeiting and its great potential for one’s own enrichment, but knowing, too, that there is no chance of engaging in it without running the immediate risk of bankruptcy under free, competitive banking and a gold standard, bankers are faced with an almost irresistible temptation. Going along with the state’s policy of monopolizing money and banking also means fulfilling one’s own dreams of getting rich fast. Not only the state comes into its own once a pure fiat money standard is established. Provided that they are accorded the privilege by the state to counterfeit in addition to its own counterfeited notes under a monetary regime of less than 100-percent-reserve banking, with the central bank functioning as a last resort counterfeiter banks can only too easily be persuaded to regard the establishment of such a monetary system as their ultimate goal and as a universal panacea.[^16]

Economically, this coalition between the state—as the dominant partner—and the banking system—as its affiliate—leads to permanent inflation (constrained only by the imperative of not overdoing it and causing a breakdown of the entire monetary system), to credit expansion and steadily recurring boom-bust cycles, and to a smooth uninterrupted income and wealth redistribution in the state’s and the banks’ favor.

Jeszcze ważniejsze są jednak socjologiczne implikacje tego sojuszu: Z jego formacją w społeczeństwie obywatelskim powstaje klasa rządząca, której interesy ściśle związane są z interesami państwa. Through its cooperation the state can now extend its coercive power to practically every area of society.

Przed ustanowieniem sojuszu państwowo-bankowego socjologiczny rozdział między państwem a społeczeństwem, tj. między wyzyskującą klasą rządzącą a klasą wyzyskiwanych producentów, jest prawie pełny i wyraźnie widoczny. Here is a civil society that produces all economic wealth; and there is the state and its representatives who draw parasitically on what others have produced. People are members either of civil society or the state and see their own interests connected with either the former or the latter. To be sure, there are then redistributive activities going on which favor parts of society at the expense of others and which help divert interests from the pursuit of economic integration to that of supporting exploitation. Yet social corruption is unsystematic at this stage. It is not corruption of social classes which are connected society-wide, but rather corruption of various disparate and dispersed individuals or groups. And these interests are only connected to those of the state rather tenuously through certain specific redistributive state activities, rather than through a direct cash-connection.

With the formation of a state-banking alliance all this becomes different. A cash-connection between parts of civil society and the state exists—and nothing ties people more closely together than joint financial interests. Moreover, this connection is established between the state and what can be identified not only as a closely interconnected social class, but as one of the most widely influential and powerful ones. In fact, it is not just the banks who join interests with the state and its policy of exploitation. The banks’ major clients, the business establishment and the leaders of industry become deeply integrated in the state’s counterfeiting schemes, too. For it is they who, apart from state and banks, are the earliest receivers of most of the regularly created counterfeit money. In receiving it before it gradually ripples through the economic system, and thereby changes relative prices as well as increases the overall price level, and in receiving credit at fraudulently lowered interest rates, they too enrich themselves at the expense of all savers and all later recipients or nonrecipients of this money.[^17]

Moreover, this financial coalition between the industrial establishment, banks, and the state tends to be reinforced by each successive course of events. Ekspansja kredytowa prowadzi do zwiększenia inwestycji i - ponieważ nie jest pokryta wzrostem rzeczywistych oszczędności - nieuchronnie doprowadzi do skorygowania. In order to avoid losses or even bankruptcy the bank’s clients will approach the banking system with an increased demand for liquidity (i.e., money). Naturally, to avoid losses of their own the banks are eager to help their clients out—and the more so the more established they are as clients. Unable to do this on their own, they turn to the state and its central bank. And the state, then, being offered another chance at its own enrichment, accepts and provides the banking system, and by extension the business establishment, with the needed liquidity by means of a new round of counterfeiting. The alliance is renewed, and the state has reaffirmed its dominant role by having saved the established banking and the industrial elite from crumbling in the face of economic competition and allowing them instead to preserve the status quo or even further increase the wealth already concentrated in their hands. There is reason to be thankful and to reciprocate with invigorated public support for the state and its propaganda.

To be sure, this coalition between the state and the economic power elite by no means implies a complete identity of interests. The various established industrial enterprises may have different or even contrary interests; and the same is true for the banks. Similarly, the interests of banks and business clients may in many respects be different. Nor do the interests of the industrial elite or the banks coincide completely with those of the state. For after all, banks as well as industrial enterprises are also in the “normal” business of making money through production and productive exchanges—whatever other sources of income acquisition may be available to them. And in this function their interests may well clash with the state’s desire for taxes, for instance. Nonetheless, the establishment of a system of monopolized money and banking still creates one interest common to all of them: an interest in the preservation of the state apparatus and the institution of political (i.e., exploitative) means of income appropriation as such. Not only could the state and its central bank destroy any commercial bank and, indirectly, practically any industrial enterprise; this threat is more severe the more established a business is. The state could also help any and all of them get richer, and more so if they are already rich. Hence, the more there is to lose from opposition and to gain from compliance, the more intensive will be the attempts by the economic power elite to infiltrate the state apparatus and have the state leaders assume financial interests in the business world. Bankers and industrialists become politicians; and politicians take positions in banking and industry. A social system emerges and is increasingly characteristic of the modern world in which the state and a closely associated class of banking and business leaders exploit everyone else.[^18][^19]

[^16]: On the enthusiastic participation of the banking elite in the creation of the Federal Reserve System, see Rothbard, *Mystery of Banking*, chaps. XV, XVI.

[^17]: On the formation of the state-banking-business coalition, see Gabriel Kolko, *The Triumph of Conservatism* (Chicago: Free Press, 1967); *Railroads and Regulations* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1965); James Weinstein, *The Corporate Ideal in the Liberal State* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1968); Richard Radosh and Murray N. Rothbard, eds., *A New History of Leviathan* (New York: Dutton, 1972).

[^18]: W Marksitowskiej tradycji ten krok rozwoju społecznego jest nazywany "kapitalizmem monpolistycznym," "kapitalizmem finansowym," lub "państowym kapitalizmem monopolistycznym"

The descriptive part of Marxist analyses is generally valuable. In unearthing the close personal and financial links between state and business, they usually paint a much more realistic picture of the present economic order than do the mostly starry-eyed “bourgeois economists.” Analytically, however, they get almost everything wrong and turn the truth upside down.

The traditional, correct pre-Marxist view on exploitation was that of radical laissez-faire liberalism as espoused by, for instance, Charles Comte and Charles Dunoyer. According to them, antagonistic interests do not exist between capitalists as owners of factors of production and laborers, but between, on the one hand, the producers in society, i.e., homesteaders, producers and contractors, including businessmen as *well* as workers, and on the other hand, those who acquire wealth nonproductively and/or noncontractually, i.e., the state and stateprivileged groups, such as feudal landlords. This distinction was first confused by Saint-Simon, who had at some time been influenced by Comte and Dunoyer, and who classified market businessmen along with feudal lords and other stateprivileged groups as exploiters. Marx took up this confusion from Saint-Simon and compounded it by making only capitalists exploiters and all workers exploited, justifying this view through a Ricardian labor theory of value and his theory of surplus value. Essentially, this view on exploitation has remained typical for Marxism to this day despite Böhm-Bawerk’s smashing refutation of Marx’s exploitation theory and his explanation of the difference between factor prices and output prices through time preference (interest). To this day, whenever Marxist theorists talk about the exploitative character of monopoly capitalism, they see the root cause of this in the continued existence of the private ownership of means of production. Even if they admit a certain degree of independence of the state apparatus from the class of monopoly capitalists (as in the version of “state monopoly capitalism”), for them it is not the state that makes capitalist exploitation possible; rather it is the fact that the state is an agency of capitalism, an organization that transforms the narrow-minded interests of individual capitalists into the interest of an ideal universal capitalist (the *ideelle Gesamtkapitalist*), which explains the existence of exploitation.

In fact, as explained, the truth is precisely the opposite: It is the state that by its very nature is an exploitative organization, and capitalists can engage in exploitation only insofar as they stop being capitalists and instead join forces with the state. Rather than speaking of state monopoly capitalism, then, it would be more appropriate to call the present system “state financed monopoly socialism,” or “bourgeois socialism.”

W przypadku reprezentatywnych studiów marksistowskich patrz: Rudolf Hilferding, *Kapitał finansowy* (Londyn: Routledge i Kegan Paul, 1981); V.I. Lenin, *Imperializm Ostatni etap kapitalizmu* (Moskwa: Wydawnictwo Języków Obcych, 1947); Paul M. Sweezy, *Teoria kapitalistycznego rozwoju* (Nowy Jork: Miesięczny Przegląd Prasowy, 1942); Paul A. Baran i Paul M. Sweezy, *Kapitał monopolowy* (Nowy Jork: Miesięczny Przegląd Prasowy, 1966); Ernest Mandel, *Marksistowska teoria ekonomiczna* (Londyn: Merlin, 1962); *Późny kapitalizm* (Londyn: Nowe Lewicowe Książki, 1975); Herbert Meissner, edytor, *Gospodarka burżuazyjna bez perspektywy* (Wschodni Berlin: Dietz, 1976); o perwersji klasycznej analizy klasy liberalnej poprzez marksizm, patrz w Murray N. Rothbard, "Lewo i Prawo" w *Egalitaryzm Jako Bunt Przeciwko Naturze i Inne Eseje* (Waszyngton, Dystrykt Kolumbii: Libertariański Przegląd Prasowy, 1974); w sprawie obalenia marksistowskiej teorii wyzysku, patrz Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk *Karol Marks i Zamknięcie Jego Systemu*, edytor Paul M. Sweezy, (Nowy Jork: Augustus M. Kelley, 1948).

[^19]: To recognize the far-reaching integration of state interests and those of the economic power elite, which is brought about by the monopolization of money and banking, is not to say that there cannot be conflicts arising within this coalition. As mentioned earlier, the state is also characterized, for instance, by the necessity of democratizing its constitution. And the democratic process could well bring egalitarian or populist sentiments to the surface which were opposed to the state’s favorable treatment of banks and big business. However, it is precisely the financial nature of the state-business connection that makes such an occurrence unlikely. For not only would this pose an immediate threat to the economic power elite; it would also imply severe financial losses in state income, even if it did not threaten the stability of the state as such. Hence a powerful incentive exists for both sides to join forces in filtering any such sentiment out of the political process before it ever becomes widely heard and to ensure with all resources at their command that the range of political alternatives admitted to public discussion is so restricted as to systematically exclude any scrutinizing of their joint counterfeiting racket.

See on this also such—in spite of their characteristic leftist misconceptions—informative studies as C. Wright Mills, *The Power Elite* (New York: 1965); G. William Domhoff, *Who Rules America?* (New York: 1967); E.E. Schattschneider, *The Semi-Sovereign People* (New York: Holt 1960); Peter Bachrach and Morton Baratz, *Power and Poverty* (New York: 1970); C. Offe, *Strukturprobleme des Kapitalistischen Staates* (Frankfurt/M. Suhrkamp, 1972).