### Demonstrated Preference and Private Property

[^0]: Reply to David Osterfeld, “Comment on Hoppe”, *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Spring/Summer, 1988).

Professor Osterfeld, after generously acknowledging the “pathbreaking” nature of my a priori defense of the ethics of private property, concentrates on four objections to my arguments.

I will comment on all four objections that Professor Osterfeld addresses. However, since they depend on a correct understanding of my central argument and its logical force, I will first restate my case in the briefest possible way.

As Osterfeld correctly notices, I give a praxeological proof for the validity of the essentially Lockean private property ethic. More precisely, I demonstrate that only this ethic can be argumentatively justified because it is the praxeological presupposition of argumentation, and any deviating ethical proposal can hence be shown to be in violation of demonstrated preference. Such a proposal can be raised, but its propositional content would contradict the ethic for which one would demonstrate a preference by virtue of one’s own act of proposition-making, i.e., by the act of engaging in argumentation. In the same way as one can say “I am and always shall be indifferent towards doing things” though this proposition contradicts the act of proposition-making, which reveals subjective *preferences* (saying this rather than saying something else or not saying anything at all), deviationist ethical proposals are falsified by the reality of actually proposing them.

To reach this conclusion and properly understand its importance, two insights are essential.

First, the question of what is just or unjust (or what is valid or not) only arises insofar as I am and others are capable of propositional exchanges—of argumentation. The question does not arise for a stone or fish because they are incapable of producing validity-claiming propositions. Yet if this is so—and one cannot deny that it is without contradicting oneself, for one cannot argue the case that one cannot argue—then any ethical proposal, or indeed any proposition, must be assumed to claim it can be validated by propositional or argumentative means. In producing any proposition, overtly or as an internal thought, one demonstrates one’s preference for the willingness to rely on argumentative means to convince oneself or others of something. There is then no way of justifying anything unless it is a justification by means of propositional exchanges and arguments. It must be considered the ultimate defeat for an ethical proposal if one can demonstrate that its content is logically incompatible with the proponent’s claim that its validity be ascertainable by argumentative means. To demonstrate such incompatibility would amount to an impossibility proof, and such proof is deadly in the realm of intellectual inquiry.

Second, the means with which a person demonstrates preference by engaging in argumentation are those of private property. Obviously, no one could propose anything or become convinced of any proposition by argumentative means if a person’s right to exclusive use of his physical body were not presupposed. Furthermore, it would be equally impossible to sustain argumentation and rely on the propositional force of one’s arguments if one were not allowed to appropriate other scarce goods through homesteading action, by putting them to use before somebody else does, or if such goods and the right of exclusive control regarding them were not defined in objective physical terms. If such a right were not presupposed, or if latecomers had legitimate claims to things, or things owned were defined in subjective evaluative terms, no one could survive as a physically independent decision-making unit; hence, no one could ever raise any validity-claiming proposition.

Thus, by being alive and formulating propositions, one demonstrates that any ethic except that of private property is invalid.

Osterfeld’s fourth objection states that my argument is an instance of ethical naturalism, but that I then fall afoul of the naturalistic fallacy of deriving an “ought” from an “is”. The first part of this proposition is acceptable, but not the second. What I offer is an entirely value-free system of ethics. I remain exclusively in the realm of isstatements and nowhere try to drive an “ought” from an “is”. The structure of my argument is this: (a) justification is propositional or argumentative (a priori true is-statement); (b) argumentation presupposes the recognition of the private property ethic (a priori true is-statement); (c) no deviation from a private property ethic can be justified argumentatively (a priori true is-statement). Thus, my refutation of all socialist ethics is a purely cognitive one. That Rawls or other socialists may still advocate such ethics is completely beside the point. That one plus one equals two does not rule out the possibility that someone says it is three, or that one ought not attempt to make one plus one equal three the arithmetic law of the land. However, this does not affect the fact that one plus one still *is* two. In strict analogy to this, I “only” claim to prove that whatever Rawls or other socialists say is false and can be understood as such by all intellectually competent and honest men. It does not change the fact that incompetence or dishonesty and evil still may exist and may even prevail over truth and justice.

The second objection suffers from the same misunderstanding of the value-free nature of my defense of private property. Osterfeld agrees that argumentation presupposes the recognition of private property. But then he wonders about the source of this right. Yet how can he raise such a question? Only because he, too, is capable of argumentation. Without argumentation there would be nothing but silence or meaningless noise. The answer is that the source of human rights is and must be argumentation as the manifestation of our rationality. It is impossible to claim anything else to be the starting point for the derivation of an ethical system because claiming so would once again have to presuppose one’s argumentative capability. Could rights not be derived from a contract behind a “veil of ignorance” asks Osterfeld? Yes and no. Of course, there can be rights derived from contracts, but in order for a contract to be possible, there must already be private owners and private property; otherwise there would be no physically independent contractors and nothing to contractually agree upon. And “no”: no rights can be derived “from behind a veil of ignorance” because no one lives behind such a thing except epistemological zombies, and only a Rawlsian zombie ethic can be derived from behind it. Can rights emerge from tradition a la Hume or Burke? Of course, they always do. But the question of the factual emergence of rights has nothing to do with the question of whether or not what exists can be justified.

In his third objection, Osterfeld claims that I construct an alternative between either individual ownership or world community ownership but that such an alternative is not exhaustive. This is a misrepresentation. Nowhere do I say anything like this. In the section to which Osterfeld refers, I am concerned with explaining the entirely different alternative between property as defined in physical terms and as originating at definite points in time for definite individuals in contrast to property as defined in value terms and nonspecific with respect to its time of origin, and the refutation of the latter as absurd and self-contradictory. I do not at all rule out the possibility of ownership of “intermediate communities”. However, such ownership presupposes individual private ownership. Collective ownership requires contracts, and contracts are only possible if there are already prior noncontractually acquired ownership claims. Contracts are agreements between physically independent units which are based on the mutual recognition of each contractor’s private ownership claim to things acquired prior to the agreement and which concern the transfer of these property titles from a specific prior to a specific later owner or owners.

Regarding Osterfeld’s first objection, I did not write that the fundamental goals of political economy and political philosophy are “complementary” ones. What I said is that they are different. No one trying to answer ‘What is just”? is logically committed to insisting that his answer must also contribute to the greatest possible production of wealth (at least I don’t contend anywhere that there is any such logical commitment!). Hence, it is no valid objection to my remarks on the relationship between political philosophy and economy that Hobbes, Rousseau, and others suggest that political systems do not increase wealth but rather scarcity. Their claim that such systems are just cannot be made good, and as it turns out, the ethic which alone can be justified indeed helps maximize wealth production. Fortunately, this is a matter of fact. It does not change in the least the fact that political philosophy and political economy are concerned with completely separate issues.

This and only this has been my thesis: While political philosophers as such need not be concerned with the problem of alleviation of scarcity, political philosophy and economy have in common the fact that without scarcity neither discipline would make any sense. There would be no interpersonal conflict over anything, and no question as to what norms should be accepted as just in order to avoid such possible clashes! It is no stretching of the point to say that political philosophers have invariably been concerned with the assignment of rights of exclusive control over scarce goods. Such is the case when a Lockean proposes to accept the private property ethic, and no less when a Hobbesian suggests, instead, to make some person the supreme Führer, whose commands everyone else must follow.
