### Konsepsi dan Pemahaman

Tugas ilmu tindakan manusia adalah pemahaman akan makna dan relevansi dari tindakan manusia. Mereka mengajukan sebagai dua prosedur epistemologis yang berbeda ini: konsepsi dan pemahaman. Konsepsi merupakan alat batin dari praksiologi; pemahaman adalah alat batin yang spesifik dari sejarah.

Kognisi praksiologi adalah kognisi konseptual. Hal ini mengacu pada apa yang diperlukan dalam tindakan manusia. Ini merupakan kognisi universal dan kategori.

Kognisi sejarah mengacu pada apa yang unik dan individual dalam setiap peristiwa atau kelas dari kejadian. Ia menganalisis awal setiap objek penelitiannya dengan bantuan alat batin yang disediakan oleh semua ilmu lainnya. Setelah mencapai pekerjaan pendahuluan ini, ia menghadapi masalah spesifiknya sendiri; uraian mengenai fitur unik dan individual dari hal ini melalui pemahaman.

Seperti yang telah disebutkan di atas, telah ditegaskan bahwa sejarah tidak akan pernah ilmiah karena pemahaman historis tergantung pada penilaian nilai subjektif sejarawan. Pemahaman itu dipertahankan, hanya merupakan istilah eufemistis untuk kesewenang-wenangan. Tulisan sejarawan selalu sepihak dan parsial; mereka tidak melaporkan fakta; mereka mendistorsikannya.

Tentu saja, ini merupakan sebuah fakta bahwa kita memiliki buku sejarah yang ditulis dari berbagai sudut pandang. Ada sejarah Reformasi ditulis melalui sudut pandang Katolik dan ada pula yang ditulis melalui sudut pandang Protestan. Ada sejarah "proletar" dan ada sejarah "borjuis", Sejarawan Tory dan sejarawan Whig; setiap bangsa, partai, dan kelompok linguistik memiliki sejarawan dan gagasannya sendiri mengenai sejarah.

Namun masalah yang ditafsirkan melalui perbedaan penafsiran ini tidak bisa disalahartikan dengan penyimpangan fakta yang disengaja oleh propagandis dan apologis yang berparade sebagai sejarawan. Fakta tersebut yang mana dapat dibangun dengan cara yang tidak perlu dipertanyakan mengenai sumber bahan yang tersedia harus ditetapkan sebagai karya awal sejarawan. Ini bukanlah sebuah bidang untuk pemahaman. Ini adalah sebuah tugas yang harus dilakukan dengan menggunakan alat-alat yang disediakan oleh semua ilmu non sejarah. Fenomena tersebut dikumpulkan melalui pengamatan kritis terhadap catatan yang tersedia. Sejauh teori-teori ilmu non sejarah di mana sejarawan mendasarkan pemeriksaan kritisnya terhadap sumber-sumber tersebut sangat bisa diandalkan dan pasti, tidak mungkin terdapat perselisihan yang sewenang-wenang sehubungan dengan pembentukan fenomena seperti itu. Apa yang dikatakan seorang sejarawan adalah salah satu kebenaran atau bertentangan dengan fakta, terbukti atau dibantah oleh dokumen yang ada, atau samar karena sumbernya tidak memberikan kami informasi yang memadai. Para ahli mungkin tidak setuju, namun hanya berdasarkan interpretasi yang wajar atas bukti yang telah tersedia. Pembahasan tidak memungkinkan adanya setiap pernyataan sewenang-wenang.

Tetapi sejarawan sangat sering tidak setuju dengan ajaran ilmu non sejarah. Kemudian, tentu saja ketidaksepahaman sehubungan dengan pemeriksaan kritis terhadap catatan dan kesimpulan yang dapat ditarik dari mereka bisa terjadi. Timbul konflik yang tidak terjembatani. Namun penyebabnya bukanlah kesewenang-wenangan yang berkenaan dengan fenomena historis yang konkret. Ini berasal dari sebuah isu yang tidak pasti yang mengacu pada ilmu non sejarah.

Seorang sejarawan Cina kuno dapat melaporkan bahwa dosa sang kaisar telah membawa kekeringan bencana dan hujan akan turun kembali ketika penguasa telah menebus dosanya. Tidak ada sejarawan modern yang mau menerima sebuah laporan seperti itu. Doktrin meteorologi yang mendasari pertentangan tehadap dasar-dasar ilmu pengetahuan alam kontemporer yang tidak terbantahkan. Tapi tidak ada suara bulat semacam itu yang berkenaan dengan banyak masalah teologis, biologis, dan ekonomi. Oleh karena itu sejarawan tidak sepakat.

Seorang pendukung doktrin rasial Nordik-Aryaisme akan mengabaikannya sebagai sesuatu yang luar biasa dan hanya mempercayai laporan tentang prestasi intelektual dan moral dari ras "inferior". Dia akan memperlakukan laporan seperti itu dengan cara yang sama seperti semua sejarawan modern menangani laporan China yang disebutkan di atas. Tidak ada kesepakatan mengenai setiap fenomena sejarah kekristenan yang bisa dicapai antara orang-orang yang ajarannya adalah Kitab Injil dan orang-orang yang matanya merupakan dokumen manusia. Sejarawan Katolik dan Protestan tidak setuju dengan banyak pertanyaan mengenai fakta karena mereka memulai dari ide teologis yang berbeda. Seorang Merkantilis atau Neo-Merkantilis pasti berbeda dengan seorang ekonom. Sebuah catatan sejarah moneter Jerman pada tahun 1914 sampai 1923 dikondisikan oleh doktrin moneter penulisnya. Fakta-fakta dari Revolusi Prancis disajikan dengan cara yang sangat berbeda oleh orang-orang yang percaya akan hak suci raja yang diurapi dan orang-orang yang memegang pandangan lain.

Sejarawan tidak setuju dengan isu-isu seperti itu yang tidak sesuai dengan kapasitas mereka sebagai sejarawan, namun dalam penerapan ilmu non sejarah mereka ke pokok permasalahan sejarah. Mereka tidak setuju karena dokter agnostik tidak setuju dalam hal keajaiban dari Lourdes dengan anggota komite medis untuk mengumpulkan bukti mengenai keajaiban ini. Hanya mereka yang percaya bahwa fakta menulis cerita mereka sendiri ke dalam tabula rasa dari pikiran manusia menyalahkan sejarawan untuk perbedaan opini seperti itu. Mereka gagal menyadari bahwa sejarah tidak akan pernah dapat dipelajari tanpa prasangka, dan pertikaian yang berkaitan terhadap prasangka, yaitu keseluruhan isi cabang pengetahuan non sejarah, harus menentukan pembentukan fakta sejarah.

Pengandaian ini juga menentukan keputusan sejarawan mengenai pilihan fakta untuk bisa disebutkan dan akan diabaikan sebagai yang tidak relevan. Dalam menelusuri penyebab seekor sapi yang tidak menghasilkan susu, dokter hewan modern akan mengabaikan sepenuhnya semua laporan mengenai mata iblis penyihir; pandangannya pasti akan berbeda dengan tiga ratus tahun yang lalu. Melalui cara yang sama sejarawan memilih dari banyak peristiwa tanpa batas yang mendahului fakta yang dia hadapi dengan hal-hal yang bisa menyebabkan kemunculannya--atau telah menundanya--dan yang diabaikan, merujuk pada pemahamannya tentang ilmu-ilmu non-sejarah, tidak mungkin memengaruhinya.

Perubahan dalam ajaran ilmu non sejarah berakibat kepada penulisan ulang sejarah. Setiap generasi harus membicarakan kembali masalah sejarah yang sama karena mereka muncul dalam sebuah cahaya yang berbeda. Pandangan teologis dunia yang kuno menyebabkan perlakuan sejarah selain daripada teorema ilmu alam modern. Ekonomi subyektif menghasilkan karya sejarah yang sangat berbeda dari yang didasarkan pada doktrin merkantilis. Sejauh penyimpangan dalam buku sejarawan yang berasal dari ketidaksepakatan ini, mereka bukanlah hasil dari ketidakjelasan dan ketidakpercayaan dalam studi sejarah. Sebaliknya, mereka adalah hasil dari kurangnya kebulatan suara dalam ranah ilmu-ilmu lain yang populer disebut persis dan pasti.

To avoid any possible misunderstanding it is expedient to emphasize some further points. The divergences referred to above must not be confused:

1. With purposeful ill-intentioned distortion of facts.
2. With attempts to justify or to condemn any actions from a legal or moral point of view.
3. With the merely incidental insertion of remarks expressing value judgments in a strictly objective representation of the state of affairs. A treatise on bacteriology does not lose its objectivity if the author, accepting the human viewpoint, considers the preservation of human life as an ultimate end and, applying this standard, labels effective methods of fighting germs good and fruitless methods bad. A germ writing such a book would reverse these judgments, but the material content of its book would not differ from that of the human bacteriologist. In the same way a European historian dealing with the Mongol invasions of the thirteenth century may speak of "favorable" and "unfavorable" events because he takes the standpoint of the European defenders of Western civilization. But this approval of one party's standard of value need not necessarily interfere with the material content of his study. It may--from the viewpoint of contemporary knowledge--be absolutely objective. A Mongolian historian could endorse it completely but for such casual remarks.
4. With a representation of one party's action in diplomatic or military antagonisms. The clash of conflicting groups can be dealt with from the point of view of the ideas, motives, and aims which impelled either side's acts. For a full comprehension of what happened it is necessary to take account of what was done on both sides. The outcome was the result of the interaction of both parties. But in order to understand their actions the historian must try to see things as they appeared to the acting men at the critical time, not only as we wee them now from the point of view of our present-day knowledge. A history of Lincoln's policy in the weeks and months preceding the outbreak of the Civil War is of course incomplete. But no historical study is complete. Regardless of whether the historian sympathizes with the Unionists or with the Confederates or whether he is absolutely neutral, he can deal in an objective way with Lincoln's policy in the spring of 1861. Such an investigation is an indispensable preliminary to answering the broader question of how the Civil War broke out.

Now finally, having settled these problems, it is possible to attack the genuine question: Is there any subjective element in historical understanding, and, if so, in what manner does it determine the result of historical studies?

As far as the task of understanding is to establish the facts that people were motivated by definite value judgments and aimed at definite means, there cannot be any disagreement among true historians, i.e., people intent upon cognition of past events. There may be uncertainty because of the insufficient information provided by the sources available. But this has nothing to do with understanding. It refers to the preliminary work to be achieved by the historian.

But understanding has a second task to fulfill. It must appraise the effects and the intensity of the effects brought about by an action; it must deal with the relevance of each motive and each action.

Here we are faced with one of the main differences between physics and chemistry on the one hand and the sciences of human action on the other. In the realm of physical and chemical events there exist (or, at least, it is generally assumed that there exist) constant relations between magnitudes, and man is capable of discovering these constants with a reasonable degree of precision by means of laboratory experiments. No such constant relations exist in the field of human action outside of physical and chemical technology and therapeutics. For some time economists believed that they had discovered such a constant relation in the effects of changes in the quantity of money upon commodity prices. It was asserted that a rise or fall in the quantity of money in circulation must result in proportional changes of commodity prices. Modern economics has clearly and irrefutably exposed the fallaciousness of this statement.[^17]

Outside of the field of economic history nobody ever ventured to maintain that constant relations prevail in human history. It is a fact that in the armed conflicts fought in the past between Europeans and backward peoples of other races, one European soldier was usually a match for several native fighters. But nobody was ever foolish enough to "measure" the magnitude of European superiority.

The impracticability of measurement is not due to the lack of technical methods for the establishment of measure. It is due to the absence of constant relations. If it were only caused by technical insufficiency, at least an approximate estimation would be possible in some cases. But the main fact is that there are no constant relations. Economics is not, as ignorant positivists repeat again and again, backward because it is not "quantitative." It is not quantitative and does not measure because there are no constants. Statistical figures referring to economic events are historical data. They tell us what happened in a nonrepeatable historical case. Physical events can be interpreted on the ground of our knowledge concerning constant relations established by experiments. Historical events are not open to such an interpretation.

The historian can enumerate all the factors which cooperated in bringing about a known effect and all the factors which worked against them and may have resulted in delaying and mitigating the final outcome. But he cannot coordinate, except by understanding, the various causative factors in a quantitative way to the effects produced. He cannot, except by understanding, assign to each of ::n:: factors its role in producing the effect ::P::. Understanding is in the realm of history the equivalent, as it were, of quantitative analysis and measurement.

Technology can tell us how thick a steel plate must be in order not to be pierced by a bullet fired at a distance of 300 yards from a Winchester rifle. It can thus answer the question why a man who took shelter behind a steel plate of a known thickness was hurt or not hurt by a shot fired. History is at a loss to explain with the same assurance why there was a rise in the price of milk of 10 per cent or why President Roosevelt defeated Governor Dewey in the election of 1944 or why France was from 1870 to 1940 under a republican constitution. Such problems do not allow any treatment other than that of understanding.

To every historical factor understanding tries to assign its relevance. In the exercise of understanding there is no room for arbitrariness and capriciousness. The freedom of the historian is limited by his endeavor to provide a satisfactory explanation of reality. His guiding star must be the search for truth. But there necessarily enters into understanding an element of subjectivity. The understanding of the historian is always tinged with the marks of his personality. It reflects the mind of its author.

The a priori sciences--logic, mathematics, and praxeology--aim at a knowledge unconditionally valid for all beings endowed with the logical structure of the human mind. The natural sciences aim at a cognition valid for all those beings which are not only endowed with the faculty of human reason but with human senses. The uniformity of human logic and sensation bestows upon these branches of knowledge the character of universal validity. Such at least is the principle guiding the study of the physicists. Only in recent years have they begun to see the limits of their endeavors and, abandoning the excessive pretensions of older physicist, discovered the "uncertainty principle." They realize today that there are unobservables whose unobservability is a matter of epistemological principle.[^19]

Historical understanding can never produce results which must be accepted by all men. Two historians who fully agree with regard to the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences and with regard to the establishment of the facts as far as they can be established without recourse to the understanding of relevance, may disagree in their understanding of the relevance of these facts. They may fully agree in establishing that the factors ::a::, ::b::, and ::c:: worked together in producing the effect ::P::; nonetheless they can widely disagree with regard to the relevance of the respective contributions of ::a::, ::b::, and ::c:: to the final outcome. As far as understanding aims at assigning its relevance to each factor, it is open to the influence of subjective judgments. Of course, these are not judgments of value, they do not express preferences of the historian. They are judgments of relevance.[^20]

Historians may disagree for various reasons. They may hold different views with regard to the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences; they may base their reasoning on a more or less complete familiarity with the records; they may differ in the understanding of the motives and aims of the acting men and of the means applied by them. All these differences are open to a settlement by "objective" reasoning; it is possible to reach a universal agreement with regard to them. But as far as historians disagree with regard to judgments of relevance it is impossible to find a solution which all sane men must accept.

The intellectual methods of science do not differ in kind from those applied by the common man in his daily mundane reasoning. The scientist uses the same tools which the layman uses; he merely uses them more skillfully and cautiously. Understanding is not a privilege of the historians. It is everybody's business. In observing the conditions of his environment everybody is a historian. Everybody uses understanding in dealing with the uncertainty of future events to which he must adjust his own actions. The distinctive reasoning of the speculator is an understanding of the relevance of the various factors determining future events. And--let us emphasize it even at this early point of our investigations--action necessarily always aims at future and therefore uncertain conditions and thus is always speculation. Acting man looks, as it were, with the eyes of a historian into the future.

#### Natural history and Human History

Cosmogony, geology, and the history of biological changes are historical disciplines as they deal with unique events of the past. However, they operate exclusively with the epistemological methods

of the natural sciences and have no need for understanding. They must sometimes take recourse to only approximate estimates of magnitudes. But such estimates are not judgments of relevance. They are a less perfect method of determining quantitative relations than is "exact" measurement. They must not be confused with the state of affairs in the field of human action which is characterized by the absence of constant relations.

If we speak of history, what we have in mind is only the history of human action, whose specific mental tool is understanding.

The assertion that modern natural science owes all its achievements to the experimental method is sometimes assailed by referring to astronomy. Now, modern astronomy is essentially an application of the physical laws, experimentally discovered on the earth, to the celestial bodies. In earlier days astronomy was mainly based on the assumption that the movements of the celestial bodies would not

change their course. Copernicus and Kepler simply tried to guess in what kind of curve the earth moves around the sun. As the circle was considered the "most perfect" curve, Copernicus chose it for his theory. Later, by similar guesswork, Kepler substituted the ellipse for the circle. Only since Newton's discoveries has astronomy become a natural science in the strict sense.

[^17]: See below, pp. 412-414.

[^18]: Cf. below, p. 351.

[^19]: Cf. A. Eddington, *The Philosophy of Physical Science* (New York, 1939), pp. 28-48.

[^20]: As this is not a dissertation on general epistemology, but the indispensable foundation of a treatise of economics, there is no need to stress the analogies between the understanding of historical relevance and the tasks to be accomplished by a diagnosing physician. The epistemology of biology is outside of the scope of our inquiries.
