There are limitations to the standard economic model of supply and demand curves intersecting to reveal the optimal or equilibrium price and quantity of a good. Those limitations, as Austrians are well aware, are due to unrealistic assumptions. But noting that the assumptions are out of this world is not enough, especially if the models are used to explain a world that does not match the assumptions. The application of the simplified models, which indeed reveal important facts about how the economy works, tend to lead many economists astray.

Limitation dey to de standard economic model of supply and demand curves wey divide to reveal de optimal or equilibrium price and quantity of one good. Dose limitations, as Austrians dem dey aware, na due to unrealistic assumptions. But make dem take not say de assumption dey out of dis world dey enough, especially if de models na dem dey use to explain one world wey no match wetin dem dey assume. The application of De simplified models, wey indeed reveal important facts about how De economy dey work, fit go lead many economist to de wrong direction.

# Increasing Costs to Producers Does Not Increase Prices 

# Say dem Increase Costs to Producers E no Mean Say Price Go Increase

A [recent EconTalk episode](http://www.econtalk.org/archives/2017/02/tom*wainwright.html), in which the host Russ Roberts interviews journalist and author Tom Wainwright of the *Economist* on his recent book *[Narconomics](https://www.amazon.com/Narconomics-How-Run-Drug-Cartel/dp/1610395832/?tag=misesinsti-20)*, illustrates how simple Econ 101 logic can be misleading. While the episode is well worth listening to and the discussion is both interesting and informative, a significant portion in the beginning is dedicated to discussing the issue of the price of illegal drugs. Noting an apparent “paradox” and the author’s “fantastic” argument, Roberts and Wainwright embark on and get stuck in a discussion that is fundamentally flawed and therefore may delude listeners.

One [Recent EconTalk episode](http://www.econtalk.org/archives/2017/02/tom*wainwright.html), wey de host Russ Roberts for interview journalist and de author Tom Wainwrigt of de *Economist* for im recent book *[Narconomics](https://www.amazon.com/Narconomics-How-Run-Drug-Cartel/dp/1610395832/?tag=misesinsti-20)*, clarify how simple Econ 101 fit dey misleading.
While de episode dey well to listen to and de wetin dem dey discuss dey interesting and informative, one significant portion for de beginning dey dedicated to dey discuss matter wey relate to de price of illegal drugs. To take note dem fit see  “paradox” and de author “fantastic” argument, Roberts and Wainwright embark on and cum get stuck for inside de discussion wey dey fundamentally flawed and therefore fit delude people wey dey listen.
Mentre de episodio dey bene ad ascoltare e de wetin dem dey discutere dey interessante e informativo, una parte significativa per la de inizio dey dedicato al dey discutere la questione wey si riferiscono a de prezzo di droghe illegali. Prendere nota dem fit vedere “paradosso” e autore de “fantastico” argomento, Roberts e Wainwright intraprendere e cum ottenere bloccato all'interno de la discussione wey dey fondamentalmente errata e quindi si adattano illudere la gente wey dey ascoltare.
In his argument, Wainwright notes that the government’s focus on cutting back on the supply of illegal drugs has not affected price as expected. He uses an example of art to illustrate the point, and this is in fact a better example than he probably realized. Here’s his example: If the paint used to produce a painting costs $50 and a certain painting is sold at the price of $1,000,000, then raising the cost of a box of paint by 100 percent to $100 should also double the price of paintings — the next painting should be expected to be sold for $2,000,000. But it does not, the price of this painter’s next painting may still be $1,000,000, or, to reflect the increased cost, $1,000,050.
Nella sua argomentazione, Wainwright note che il fuoco del governo sul taglio indietro sulla fornitura di droghe illegali non ha influenzato il prezzo come previsto. Egli usa un esempio di arte per illustrare il punto, e questo è in effetti un esempio migliore di lui probabilmente realizzato. Ecco il suo esempio: Se la vernice utilizzata per produrre un dipinto costa $50 e un certo pittura è venduto al prezzo di $1.000.000, quindi l'aumento del costo di una scatola di vernice da 100 per cento a $100 dovrebbero anche il doppio del prezzo di dipinti — il dipinto dovrebbe essere venduto per $2,000,000. Ma non è, il prezzo di questo pittore dipinto può ancora essere di $1.000.000, o, per riflettere l'aumento dei costi, $1,000,050.
For im argument, Wainwrite note say de government focus dey to cut back on de supply of illegal drugs never fit affect de price as dem dey expect am. Im cum use use one art example to illustrate im point, and dis na beta example dan him even realize. See im example: If paint wey dem use produce one painting na $50 and one certain painting dey sell for $1,000,000, den con raise de cost of one box of pain by 100 percent to $100 dat suppose double de price of de paintings - de next painting supposed make dem sell am for $2,000,000. But e no be so, de price of dis painter’s next painting go fit still be $1,000.000 or, e fit reflect de increased  cost, $1,000,050.
Per im argomento, Wainwrite note de governo focus dey di tagliare de la fornitura di farmaci illegali non montare mai influenzare de prezzo dem dey aspettare am. Im sperma in uso in uso in un esempio per illustrare im punto, e dis na beta esempio dan lo rendono nemmeno conto. Vedere im esempio: Se la vernice wey dem producono una pittura na $50 ed una certa pittura dey vendere per $1,000,000, den con rilancio de costo di una scatola di dolore da 100 per cento a $100 dat supponiamo doppio de prezzo de quadri - de dipinto dovrebbe fare dem vendere per $2,000,000. Ma e non essere così, de prezzo di dis pittore dipinto andare fit ancora 1000$.000, e fit riflettere de aumento dei costi, $1,000,050.
The example illustrates the paradox in what is going on in the illegal drug “business” and, specifically, why government’s attempts to affect the supply have not worked. As argued by Wainwright, even partially successful measures to cut back on supply has not increased final prices for consumers (which was partly the stated rationale). This interesting and unexpected result suggests government should instead “invest” in reducing demand for illegal drugs.

De example illustrate de paradox about wetin dey go on for illegal drug “business” and specifically, why de attempt of government to affect de supply never still work. As Wainwright take argue, even partially successful measures to cut back on supply never increase final price for consumers (wey be part of de stated rationale). Dis interesting and unexpected result suggest say make government invest to reducing de demand for illegal drugs.

The problem with the argument is that it relies on the simple equilibrium analysis in the demand-and-supply models used in Econ 101 courses for university freshmen. And it doesn’t actually apply here. Had the paintings or illegal drugs markets been in equilibrium, there might indeed be a paradox. But this is hardly the case, *especially* in these markets.

De problem with De argument be say e dey rely on de simple equilibrium analysis we dey de demand- and-supply models we dem use for inside Econ 101 courses for University JJC. And e no even apply here. Assuming say de painting abi de illegal drugs market been dey equilibrium, maybe paradox for dey. But dis no come be de case, *especially* for dis markets.

Also, in a state of equilibrium costs perfectly reflect social opportunity costs, and “perfect” competition brings price and cost together so that no one is able to make economic profits. In other words, there is no difference between price and cost. There is, consequently, no reason to in this theory distinguish between them temporally or causally — they appear to be determined instantaneously and accurately. This is also how they are treated in various economics models that students learn to “maximize.”

Also, for one state of equilibrium costs dey perfectly reflect social opportunity costs, and “perfect” competition dey bring price and cost togeda so dat no one fit get level to make economic profits. For anoda word, no difference dey between de price and cost. One tin dey, consequently, no reason wey dey dis theory dey differentiate between dem temporally or casually -  dem dey appear to dey determined instantaneously and accurately. Dis na also how dem dey treat dem in various economics models wey student for dey learn to “maximize”

# Price Drives Cost  — Not the Other Way Around

# Price Drives Cost – No be De Oda Way Round

As we know, however, the real market process is driven by *entrepreneurship* and market actors are not just responsive agents. Entrepreneurs do not live in equilibrium, and they base their business decisions on their own appraisal of the different actions and their imagined outcomes. In this real market, price drives cost  — not the other way around. Indeed, Carl Menger noted that the value of any production good is derived from consumers’ valuation of the consumption goods that it produces, not the other way around. This is also core to for example Mises’s argument about economic calculation.
Come sappiamo, tuttavia, il vero processo di mercato è guidato da *imprenditorialità* e gli attori del mercato non sono solo reattivo agenti. Gli imprenditori non vivono in equilibrio, e che basano le loro decisioni di business su una propria valutazione delle diverse azioni e la loro immaginato risultati. In questo vero e proprio mercato, il prezzo di unità di costo — non l'altro senso intorno. Infatti, Carl Menger notato che il valore della produzione di ogni bene è derivato da consumatori di valutazione dei beni di consumo che produce, non l'altro senso intorno. Questo è anche il nucleo per esempio Mises argomento su calcolo economico.
As we know, however, de real market process dey driven by *entrepreneurship* and market actors wey no be responsive agents. Entrepreneurs no dey live inside equilibrium, and dem dey base their business decision on their own judgment of de different actions and de outcome of wetin dem imagined. For dis real market, price dey drive cost – no be de oda way round. Indeed, Carl Menger note am say de value of any production good na from customer valuation of the consumption goods wey dem produce, no be de oda way round. Dis one dey core for example Mises’s argument about economic calculation.
Come sappiamo, tuttavia, de mercato vero e proprio processo di dey guidato da *imprenditorialità* e gli attori di mercato wey non essere reattivo agenti. Gli imprenditori non dey vivere all'interno di equilibrio, e dem dey basare la loro decisione di business al proprio giudizio di de diverse azioni e de l'esito di wetin dem immaginato. Per dis reale di mercato, il prezzo dey unità di costo – nessun essere de aps giro. Infatti, Carl Menger nota del mattino dire de valore di produzione di ogni bene na da parte del cliente di valutazione dei beni di consumo wey dem produrre, senza essere de aps giro. Dis uno dey core per esempio Mises argomento su calcolo economico.
What this means is that entrepreneurs assume (*choose*, even) costs based on the anticipated revenue of their imagined product. The reason an expensive good is produced at high cost is that those high costs can be covered by the anticipated price that it can be sold for. It doesn’t mean that entrepreneurs choose high costs for the fun of it, but that they motivate a certain level of costs based on the anticipated price — and that price is really dependent only on consumer valuation of the final good.
Che cosa questo significa è che gli imprenditori assumono (**, anche) costi in base alle entrate previste, di aver immaginato prodotto. La ragione per cui un costoso buono viene prodotto a un costo elevato, è che tali costi possono essere coperti dalla prevista del prezzo che può essere venduto per. Ciò non significa che gli imprenditori scelgono di costi elevati per il divertimento di esso, ma che motivano un certo livello di costi in base al prezzo anticipato — e che il prezzo è davvero dipendente solo sul consumo di valutazione del bene finale.
Wetin dis mean be say entrepreneur dey assume (*choose*, even) cost based for de anticipated revenue for product wey dem imagined. De reason why dem dey produce goods wey cost at high cost fit make dem cover am by de anticipated price wey dey go wan sell am. E no mean say entrepreneur choose high cost to just catch fun, but say dem dey motivated on one certain level of cost based on de anticipated price- and dat price dey really depend only on consumer valuation of de final good.

In imperfect markets, this means there can be high markups that offer entrepreneurs enormous profits. But this is also what lures other entrepreneurs to enter this particular market, so where there are no significant barriers to entry profits will tend to get squeezed until they reach the standard market rate of return. In this process, costs are pushed down but consumer good prices even more so, thereby making consumers the ultimate winners of this process.
In mercati imperfetti, questo significa che ci possono essere alte le marcature imprenditori che offrono enormi profitti. Ma questo è anche ciò che attira altri imprenditori di entrare in questo mercato, in particolare nel modo in cui non ci sono barriere all'entrata profitti tendono ad essere spremuto fino a raggiungere gli standard di mercato e tasso di rendimento. In questo processo, i costi sono spinti verso il basso, ma come bene di consumo i prezzi ancora di più, rendendo i consumatori i vincitori di questo processo.
For market wey no perfect, dis mean say there fit be high markups way dey offer entrepreneur many profits. But dis an also wetin dey lure oda entrepreneur to enter dis kind market, so where no significant barriers to entry profits e go tend to get squeezed until dey reach de standard market rate of return. For dis process, cost dey pushed down but consumer good price even dey more so, for dat reason making consumers de ogbonge winners of dis process na win am.
Per il mercato wey non perfetto, dis significa dire che c'fit essere di alta marcature modo dey offerta imprenditore molto utili. Ma dis, anche un wetin dey attirare l'aps imprenditore di entrare dis tipo di mercato, in modo in cui non significative barriere all'ingresso profitti e andare tendono a ottenere spremuto fino dey raggiungere standard de tasso di rendimento di mercato. Per dis processo, costo dey spinto giù, ma il consumatore buon prezzo anche dey di più, per il dat motivo che spinge i consumatori de ogbonge vincitori del processo di dis na vincere am.
So it is not in any sense a paradox that the market price of a box of paint has very little to do with the final price of the painting. The box of paint is traded in the market at a price that partly is derived from the anticipated value of paintings. Similarly, the coca leaves that will eventually end up in a nostril on Wall Street *are valued because the end product is valued.*

So e no make sense say dis na paradox  say de market price of one box of paint get very little to do with de final price of de painting. De box of paint dey trade inside de market for one price wey partially dey derived from de anticipated valued of paintings. Similarly, de coca leaves wey go eventually end up inside one nostrils on Wall Street * dey valued becoz de end product dey valued.*

If government burns half of those fields, this will not lead to a doubling of the final good’s price. Instead, it will increase the costs that need to be covered by producers to make the final good available in consumer markets. As margins are enormous in illegal drug production and distribution, primarily as a result of government repression, producers don’t think twice to continue just like before without changing prices: it only causes a small dent in their income.

If government burn half of those fields, dis no go lead to one doubling of de final goods price, Instead, e go increase de cost wey need to be covered by producers to make de final good available inside consumer markets. As margins dey many for illegal drugs production and distribution, primarily as one result of government rejection, producers no go think twice to continue just like before without say dem change price. E go only cause small dent for their income.
Se il governo bruciare la metà di quei campi, dis no go portare a un raddoppio di de beni finali di prezzo, Invece, e vai aumento de costo wey devono essere coperti dai produttori per rendere il finale de la buona disposizione all'interno di mercati di consumo. Quali sono i margini di dey molti per le droghe illegali di produzione e di distribuzione, principalmente come risultato di un governo di rifiuto, i produttori non andare a pensare due volte per continuare come prima, senza dire dem modificare il prezzo. E andare solo a causa di un piccolo incavo per il loro reddito.
In Wainwright’s example, a kilo of cocaine, with a market value of $100,000 when sold in “tiny portions,” is produced from a ton of fresh coca leaf sold at a price of $500. The refined product sells at $1,000 in Columbia, and to “distributors” in the United states for $15–20,000. In this situation, if the fields of some coca farmers are burned, those farmers lose all their revenue while prices of the remaining product could potentially be bid up (assuming some form of market). How much those prices are bid up depends on the [reservation prices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reservation*price) of existing cocaine producers and the chance of new entrants. It does not cause a proportional ripple effect throughout the supply chain.

For Wainwright’s example, one kilo of cocaine, with one market value of $100,00 if dem sell am for “small portion,” dem dey produce am from a ton of fresh coca leaf and sell for the price of $500. De product wey dem refined dey sell for $1,000 inside Columbia, and to “distributors” inside De United States for $15-20,000. For dis situation, if de fields of some coca farmers burn, dose farmers go lose all their revenue while de price of de remaining products fit potentially bid up (assuming some form of market). How much dem dey bid dose price dey depend on de [reservation price]( https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reservation*price) of existing cocaine producers and de chance of new entrants. E no dey cause proportional ripple effect throughout de supply chain.
Per Wainwright esempio, un chilo di cocaina, con un valore di mercato di $100,00 se dem vendere sto “piccola porzione” dem dey produrre am da una tonnellata di fresche foglie di coca e vendere per il prezzo di $500. De prodotto wey dem raffinato dey vendere per $1.000 all'interno di Columbia, e “distributori”, all'interno De Stati Uniti per $15-20,000. Per dis situazione, se de campi di alcuni coltivatori di foglie di coca bruciare dose agricoltori andare a perdere tutte le loro entrate, mentre de prezzo de i restanti prodotti fit potenzialmente offerta (ipotizzando una qualche forma di mercato). Quanto dem dey offerta dose prezzo dey dipendono dalla de [prenotazione]( https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reservation*prezzo) esistenti cocaina produttori e de possibilità di nuovi operatori. E no dey causa proporzionale effetto a catena in tutto de catena di fornitura.
This is easy to see if we adopt the Austrian view that pricing of production goods is done “backward” through entrepreneurial bidding aiming for anticipated consumer prices. But using the supply-and-demand schedule for equilibrium prices can produce a fundamentally flawed analysis — even by those who recognize that the assumptions are unrealistic (which Roberts naturally does).

Dis one dey easy to see if we adopt de Austrian view say pricing of production goods is done “backwards” though entrepreneurial bidding aiming for anticipated consumer prices. But to use de supply-and-demand schedule for equilibrium price fit produce one fundamentally flawed analysis – even by dose people wey recognize say de assumptions dey unrealistic (wey Roberts naturally dey do).

This is not to say that the prices within the cocaine supply chain are not some form of equilibrium prices. The assumption of partial equilibrium is not what makes the analysis flawed. The error lies in failing to recognize that cost (that is, the existence and shape of supply) is a function of the anticipated price (demand) of the final good.

Dis no be to say de price wey dey between de cocaine supply chain no be some form of equilibrium price. De assumption of partial equilibrium no be im make de analysis flawed. De error dey for not failing to see say cost (dat is, de existence and shape of de supply) na function of de anticipated price (demand) of de final good.

From this follows that changes in factor prices are not necessarily reflected in prices of consumer goods, especially in the short term. Rather, they will be reflected in the profit margins of producers, and can thus cause them to change their behavior.

From dis follow say changes inside factor price no really dey reflect inside de price of consumer goods, especially for de short term. Rather, dey go just reflect for de profit margins of producers, and fit cause dem to change their behavior.
