pcm/Human Action/01_05_01.md, before:

### Time as a Praxeological Factor

The notion of change implies the notion of temporal sequence. A rigid, eternally immutable universe would be out of time, but it would be dead. The concepts of change and of time are inseparably linked together. Action aims at change and is therefore in the temporal order. Human reason is even incapable of conceiving the ideas of timeless existence and of timeless action.

He who acts distinguishes between the time before the action, the time absorbed by the action, and the time after the action has been finished. He cannot be neutral with regard to the lapse of time.

Logic and mathematics deal with an ideal system of thought. The relations and implications of their system are coexistent and interdependent. We may say as well that they are synchronous or that they are out of time. A perfect mind could grasp them all in one thought. Man's inability to accomplish this makes thinking itself an action, proceeding step by step from the less satisfactory state of insufficient cognition to the more satisfactory state of better insight. But the temporal order in which knowledge is acquired must not be confused with the logical simultaneity of all parts of an aprioristic deductive system. Within such a system the notions of anteriority and consequence are metaphorical only. They do not refer to the system, but to our action in grasping it. The system itself implies neither the category of time nor that of causality. There is functional correspondence between elements, but there is neither cause nor effect.

What distinguishes epistemologically the praxeological system from the logical system is precisely that it implies the categories both of time and of causality. The praxeological system too is aprioristic and deductive. As a system it is out of time. But change is one of its elements. The notions of sooner and later and of cause and effect are among its constituents. Anteriority and consequence are essential concepts of praxeological reasoning. So is the irreversibility of events. In the frame of the praxeological system any reference to functional correspondence is no less metaphorical and misleading than is the reference to anteriority and consequence in the frame of the logical system.[^1]

[^1]: In a treatise on economics there is no need to enter into a discussion of the endeavors to construct mechanics as an exiomatic system in which the concept of function is substituted for that of cause and effect. It will be shown later that axiomatic mechanics cannot serve as a model for the treatment of the economic system.

Commit message:

Ancap-ch Project from en into Nigerian Pidgin - 595 Words
complete translation of file

pcm/Human Action/01_05_01.md, after:

### Time as a Praxeological Factor

d belief of something wah oyinbo people the call notion d change mean say the belief of something way no go stay but the follow line by line. something way strong ,something way go last for ever for this world no go get time again for this world,but e fit be die.d style way e go take change and the time nah something way person no feat change as them both join together.something way person do way feat carry am go change and nah something way no go last long.people the reasoning no even get power way feat make other people believe say something way be say enough time  no day to leave and enough time no day to do something.

person wah the do something defferntly from time to time befor the time way em suppose do ahm rich,d time way the person use do the thing , and the time after the person done do the thing finished.the person way stand on em own with the time way done pass.

watin oyinbo people the call logic and mathimatics concern with idea and the way wah person the take think.d thin way join two people together and the result way person d  get after em do something nah wathing oyinbo d call coexistent an interdependent.people fit say e  good  as watin oyinbo d call synchronous or something way no get time.correct person fet do all of them one time.person power to do something na em make sense get power,continue step by step from the one way no too sweet you to the one way be like say e over sweet you to watin oyinbo people the call cognition.but for d mean time way be say sense get power most confuse the won way them talk for mouth follow line by line with all part way oyinbo peopl the call aprioristic deductive systerm.with that kind of style with watin oyinbo people d call notions of anteriority an consequence nah d metaphorical only.them no  d talk anythin way concern the style, but to the things way we done do way oyinbo people the call grasping .d style em self mean say wader d side of of the person way something happen to.dem get different type of function of between two thing werder nah cause or nah affect.

e get how you take put weytin oyibo dey call praxeological system arrange am wit logical system take know wer time and causality they. dat thin wey oyibo dey call praxeological system get one particular principle wey person belief and deduction. as e b say time the pass person naso e be for system. and na one person make be like that Change. dat thin wey them say now now or laterr follow join for the praxeological system constituents. e get weytin oyibo the call Anteriority wey been say life na jeje e follow for vital concept of praxeological reasoning. that one na one thing wey no go ever fit change after e don happen. inside everi everi as praxeological system dey any reference wey get functional correspondence e no follow because dey thin na metaphor and he dey mislead person instead of anteriority and consequence for logical system.

[^1]: as you know say for treatise economics nid to dey to put leg inside hot water because say you wan try put mechanics as  exiomatic system for were dey concept and function bench the cause and effect. 
e go later show say axiomatic mechanics no fit solve  as weytin fit repair economic system.
