### De Limitations on Praxeological Concepts

De praxeological categories and concepts dey devised for de comprehension of human action. Dem become self-contradictory and nonsensical if one try to apply dem in dealing wit conditions different from those of human life. De naive anthropomorphism of primitive religions dey unpalatable to de philosophic mind. Howeva, de endeavors of philosophers to define, by de use of praxeological concepts, de attributes of an absolute being, free from all de limitations and frailties of human existence, dey no less questionable.

Scholastic philosophers and theologians and likewise Theists and Deists of de Age of Reason conceived an absolute and perfect being, unchangeable, omnipotent, and omniscient, and yet dem dey plan and act, aiming at end and employing means for de attainment of these ends. But action fit only be imputed to a discontented being, and repeated action only to a being wey lack de power to remove im uneasiness once and for all at one stroke. Acting being dey discontented and therefore not almighty. If im dey contented, im no go act, and if im dey almighty, im go get long since radically removed im discontent. For an all-powerful being pressure no dey to choose between different states of uneasiness; im no dey under de necessity of acquiescing for im lesser evil. Omnipotence go mean sey de power to achieve everything and to enjoy full satisfaction without dem no restrained am by any limitations. But dis dey incompatible wit de very concept of action. For an almighty being de categories wey ends and means no dey exist. Im dey above all human comprehension, concepts, and understanding. For de almighty being every "means" renders unlimited services, e it apply every "means" for de attainment of any ends, im fit achieve every end without de employment of any means. E dey beyond de faculties of de human mind to think sey de concept of almightiness consistently on im ultimate logical consequences. De paradoxes dey insoluble. Has de almighty being re power to achieve something wey dey immune to am later interference? If im get dis power, den limits dey to his might and he is no longer almighty; if im lacks dis power, im dey by virtue of dis fact alone not almighty.

Are omnipotence and omniscience compatible? Omniscience presupposes say all future happenings dey already unalterably determined. If omniscience dey, omnipotence na inconceivable. Impotence to change anything for de predetermined course of events go restrict de power of any agent.

Action na display of potency and control wey dey limited. Na manifestation of man wey im restrained by de circumscribed powers of his mind, de physiological nature of im body, de vicissitudes of im environment, and de scarcity of de external factors on which im welfare depends. E dey vain to refer to de imperfections and weaknesses of human life if person aims at depicting something absolutely perfect. De very idea of absolute perfection dey every way self-contradictory. De state of absolute perfection must dey conceived as complete, final, and no exposed any change. Change fit only impair im perfection and transform am into a less perfect state; de mere possibility wey change fit occur na incompatible wit de concept of absolute perfection. But de absence of change--i.e., perfect immutability, rigidity and immobility--na tantamount to de absence of life. Life and perfection dey incompatible, but so death and perfection sef.

The living is not perfect because it is liable to change; the dead is not perfect because it does not live.

The language of living and acting men can form comparatives and superlatives in comparing degrees. But absoluteness is not a degree; it is a limiting notion. The absolute is indeterminable, unthinkable and ineffable. It is a chimerical conception. There are no such things as perfect happiness, perfect men, eternal bliss. Every attempt to describe the conditions of a land of Cockaigne, or the life off the Angels, results in paradoxes. Where there are conditions, there are limitations and not perfection; there are endeavors to conquer obstacles, there are frustration and discontent.

After the philosophers had abandoned the search for the absolute, the utopians took it up. They weave dreams about the perfect state. They do not realize that the state, the social apparatus of compulsion and coercion, is an institution to cope with human imperfection and that its essential function is to inflict punishment upon minorities in order to protect majorities against the detrimental consequences of certain actions. With "perfect" men there would not be any need for compulsion and coercion. But utopians do not pay heed to human nature and the inalterable conditions of human life. Godwin thought that man might become immortal after the abolition of private property.[^25]

Nowadays the most popular chimeras are stabilization and security. We will test these catchwords later.

[^25]: William Godwin, *An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice and Its Influence on General Virtue and Happiness* (Dublin, 1793), II, 393-403.

[^26]: Charles Fourier, *Th*é*orie* *des quatre mouvements* (Oeuvres complètes, 3d  ed. Paris, 1846), I, 43.

[^27]: Leon Trotsky, *Literature and Revolution*, trans. by R. Strunsky (London, 1925), p. 256.
