### Conception and Understanding

De task of de sciences of human action na de comprehension of de meaning and relevance of uman action. Dem apply for dis purpose two different epistemological procedures: conception and understanding. Conception na de mental tool of praxeology; understanding na de specific mental tool of history.

De cognition of praxeology na conceptual cognition. E refers to waitin dey necessary for human action. E dey cognition of universals and categories.

De cognition of history dey refer to waiting dey unique and each person for each event or class of events. E analyzes first each object of im studies wit de help of de mental tools provided by all oda sciences. Having achieved dis preliminary work, e face im own specific problem; de elucidation of de unique and individual features of de case by means of de understanding.

As dem mentioned above, e done asserted say history fit bever be scientific because historical understanding depends on de historian’s subjective value judgments. Understanding, e dey maintained, na only euphemistic term for arbitrariness. De writings of historians dey always one-sided and partial; dem no report de facts; dem distort dem.

E dey, of course, a fact say we get historical books wey dem write from different points of view. Histories of Reformation dey written from de Catholic point of view and odas dem write from de Protestant point of view. Dere are “proletarian” histories and “bourgeois” histories, Tory historian and Whig historians; every nation, party, and linguistic group get dia own historians and dia own ideas about history.

But de problem wey dese differences of interpretation offer must not be confused wit de intentional distortion of facts by propagandists and apologists parading as historians. Those facts wey it dey established for unquestionable way on de ground of de source material available must be established as de preliminary work of de historian. Dis not be field for understanding. Na task to be accomplished by de employment of de tools provided by all nonhistorical sciences. De phenomena dey gathered by cautious critical observation of de records available. As far as de theories of de nonhistorical sciences on which de historian grounds dey critical examination of de sources dey reasonably reliable and certain, dere fit be any arbitrary disagreement wit regard to de establishment of de phenomena as such. Waitin a historian asserts dey either correct or contrary to fact, e either proved or disproved by de documents available, or vague because de sources no provide us wit sufficient information. De experts fit disagree, but only on de ground of a reasonable interpretation of de evidence available. De discussion no allow any arbitrary statements.

Howeva, de historians very often no agree wit regard to de teachings of de nonhistorical sciences. Den, of course, disagreement wit regard to de critical examination of de records and to de conclusions to be drawn from dem fit ensue. Unbridgeable conflict come arise. But im cause no be arbitrariness wit regard to de concrete historical phenomenon. Im stems from undecided issue referring to de nonhistorical sciences.

Ancient Chinese historian fit report say de emperor's sin bring about a catastrophic drought and say rain fall again wen de ruler get atoned for im sin. No modern historian go accept dis kind report. De underlying meteorological doctrine dey contrary to uncontested fundamentals of contemporary natural science. But no such unanimity exists in regard to plenty theological, biological, and economic issues. Accordingly historians disagree.

Supporter of de racial doctrine of Nordic-Aryanism go disregard as fabulous and simply unbelievable any report concerning intellectual and moral achievements of "inferior" races. He go treat such reports in de same way for all modern historians deal wit de above-mentioned Chinese report. No agreement wit regard to any phenomenon of de history of Christianity fit be attained between people for whom de gospels dey Holy Writ and people for whose eyes dem be human documents. Catholic and Protestant historians disagree about plenty questions of fact because dem start from different theological ideas. Mercantilist or Neo-Mercantilist must necessarily dey for variance wit an economist. De account of German monetary history in de years 1914 to 1923 dey conditioned by de author's monetary doctrines. De facts of de French Revolution dey presented for quite different manner by those who believe in de sacred rights of de anointed king and those who hold oda views.

De historians disagree on dis kind issues not for dia capacity as historians, but or dia application of de nonhistorical sciences to de subject matter of history. Dem disagree as agnostic doctors disagree in regard to de miracles of Lourdes wit de members of de medical committee for de collection of evidence concerning dese miracles. Only those who believe dat facts write dia own story into de tabula rasa of de human mind blame de historians for such differences of opinion. Dem fail to realize say history fit never be studied witout presuppositions, and dat dissension wit regard to de presuppositions, i.e., de whole content of de nonhistorical branches of knowledge, must determine de establishment of historical facts.

These presuppositions also determine the historian's decision concerning the choice of facts to be mentioned and those to be omitted as irrelevant. In searching for the causes of a cow's not giving milk a modern veterinarian will disregard entirely all reports concerning a witch's evil eye; his view would have been different three hundred years ago. In the same way the historian selects from the indefinite multitude of events that preceded the fact he is dealing with those which could have contributed to its emergence--or have delayed it--and neglects those which, according to his grasp of the nonhistorical sciences, could not have influenced it.

Changes for de teachings of de nonhistorical sciences consequently must involve a rewriting of history. Every generation must treat anew de same historical problems because dey appear to am in different light. De theological world view of older times lead to a treatment of history oda dan de theorems of modern natural science. Subjective economics dey produce historical works very different from those based on mercantilist doctrines. As far as divergences for de books of historians stem from these disagreements, dem dey on an outcome of alleged vagueness and precariousness in historical studies. Dem dey, on de contrary, de result of de lack of unanimity for de realm of those oda sciences wey dey popularly called certain and exact.

To avoid any possible misunderstanding e dey expedient to emphasize some further points. De divergences referred to above must not be confused:

1. Wit purposeful ill-intentioned distortion of facts.
2. Wit attempts to justify or to condemn any actions from de legal or moral point of view.
3. Wit de merely incidental insertion of remarks expressing value judgments for de strictly objective representation of de state of affairs. A treatise on bacteriology no loose im objectivity if de author, wey dey accept de human viewpoint, considers de preservation of human life as ultimate end and, applying dis standard, labels effective methods of fighting germs good and fruitless methods bad. Germ wey dey write dis kind book go reverse these judgments, but de material content of im book no go differ from dat of de human bacteriologist. For de same way European historian dealing wit de Mongol invasions of de thirteenth century fit speak of "favorable" and "unfavorable" events because im take de standpoint of de European defenders of Western civilization. But dis approval of one party's standard of value no need necessarily interfere wit de material content of im study. E fit--from de viewpoint of contemporary knowledge--be absolutely objective. A Mongolian historian fit endorse am completely but for such casual remarks.
4. Wit a representation of one party's action for diplomatic or military antagonisms. De clash of conflicting groups fit be dealt wit from de point of view of de ideas, motives, and aims which impelled either side's acts. For full comprehension of waitin happened e dey necessary to take account of wating wan done on both sides. De outcome na de result of de interaction of both parties. But in order to understand dia actions de historian must try to see thins as dem appeared to de acting men for de critical time, no beonly as we wee dem now from de point of view of our present-day knowledge. History of Lincoln's policy for de weeks and months preceding de outbreak of de Civil War is of course incomplete. But no historical study dey complete. Regardless of whether de historian sympathizes wit de Unionists or wit de Confederates or whether im dey absolutely neutral, im fit deal for objective way wit Lincoln's policy for de spring of 1861. Dis kind investigation na indispensable preliminary to answering de broader question of how de Civil War broke out.

Now finally, having settled these problems, it is possible to attack the genuine question: Is there any subjective element in historical understanding, and, if so, in what manner does it determine the result of historical studies?

As far as the task of understanding is to establish the facts that people were motivated by definite value judgments and aimed at definite means, there cannot be any disagreement among true historians, i.e., people intent upon cognition of past events. There may be uncertainty because of the insufficient information provided by the sources available. But this has nothing to do with understanding. It refers to the preliminary work to be achieved by the historian.

But understanding has a second task to fulfill. It must appraise the effects and the intensity of the effects brought about by an action; it must deal with the relevance of each motive and each action.

Here we are faced with one of the main differences between physics and chemistry on the one hand and the sciences of human action on the other. In the realm of physical and chemical events there exist (or, at least, it is generally assumed that there exist) constant relations between magnitudes, and man is capable of discovering these constants with a reasonable degree of precision by means of laboratory experiments. No such constant relations exist in the field of human action outside of physical and chemical technology and therapeutics. For some time economists believed that they had discovered such a constant relation in the effects of changes in the quantity of money upon commodity prices. It was asserted that a rise or fall in the quantity of money in circulation must result in proportional changes of commodity prices. Modern economics has clearly and irrefutably exposed the fallaciousness of this statement.[^17]

Outside of the field of economic history nobody ever ventured to maintain that constant relations prevail in human history. It is a fact that in the armed conflicts fought in the past between Europeans and backward peoples of other races, one European soldier was usually a match for several native fighters. But nobody was ever foolish enough to "measure" the magnitude of European superiority.

The impracticability of measurement is not due to the lack of technical methods for the establishment of measure. It is due to the absence of constant relations. If it were only caused by technical insufficiency, at least an approximate estimation would be possible in some cases. But the main fact is that there are no constant relations. Economics is not, as ignorant positivists repeat again and again, backward because it is not "quantitative." It is not quantitative and does not measure because there are no constants. Statistical figures referring to economic events are historical data. They tell us what happened in a nonrepeatable historical case. Physical events can be interpreted on the ground of our knowledge concerning constant relations established by experiments. Historical events are not open to such an interpretation.

The historian can enumerate all the factors which cooperated in bringing about a known effect and all the factors which worked against them and may have resulted in delaying and mitigating the final outcome. But he cannot coordinate, except by understanding, the various causative factors in a quantitative way to the effects produced. He cannot, except by understanding, assign to each of ::n:: factors its role in producing the effect ::P::. Understanding is in the realm of history the equivalent, as it were, of quantitative analysis and measurement.

Technology can tell us how thick a steel plate must be in order not to be pierced by a bullet fired at a distance of 300 yards from a Winchester rifle. It can thus answer the question why a man who took shelter behind a steel plate of a known thickness was hurt or not hurt by a shot fired. History is at a loss to explain with the same assurance why there was a rise in the price of milk of 10 per cent or why President Roosevelt defeated Governor Dewey in the election of 1944 or why France was from 1870 to 1940 under a republican constitution. Such problems do not allow any treatment other than that of understanding.

To every historical factor understanding tries to assign its relevance. In the exercise of understanding there is no room for arbitrariness and capriciousness. The freedom of the historian is limited by his endeavor to provide a satisfactory explanation of reality. His guiding star must be the search for truth. But there necessarily enters into understanding an element of subjectivity. The understanding of the historian is always tinged with the marks of his personality. It reflects the mind of its author.

The a priori sciences--logic, mathematics, and praxeology--aim at a knowledge unconditionally valid for all beings endowed with the logical structure of the human mind. The natural sciences aim at a cognition valid for all those beings which are not only endowed with the faculty of human reason but with human senses. The uniformity of human logic and sensation bestows upon these branches of knowledge the character of universal validity. Such at least is the principle guiding the study of the physicists. Only in recent years have they begun to see the limits of their endeavors and, abandoning the excessive pretensions of older physicist, discovered the "uncertainty principle." They realize today that there are unobservables whose unobservability is a matter of epistemological principle.[^19]

Historical understanding can never produce results which must be accepted by all men. Two historians who fully agree with regard to the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences and with regard to the establishment of the facts as far as they can be established without recourse to the understanding of relevance, may disagree in their understanding of the relevance of these facts. They may fully agree in establishing that the factors ::a::, ::b::, and ::c:: worked together in producing the effect ::P::; nonetheless they can widely disagree with regard to the relevance of the respective contributions of ::a::, ::b::, and ::c:: to the final outcome. As far as understanding aims at assigning its relevance to each factor, it is open to the influence of subjective judgments. Of course, these are not judgments of value, they do not express preferences of the historian. They are judgments of relevance.[^20]

Historians may disagree for various reasons. They may hold different views with regard to the teachings of the nonhistorical sciences; they may base their reasoning on a more or less complete familiarity with the records; they may differ in the understanding of the motives and aims of the acting men and of the means applied by them. All these differences are open to a settlement by "objective" reasoning; it is possible to reach a universal agreement with regard to them. But as far as historians disagree with regard to judgments of relevance it is impossible to find a solution which all sane men must accept.

The intellectual methods of science do not differ in kind from those applied by the common man in his daily mundane reasoning. The scientist uses the same tools which the layman uses; he merely uses them more skillfully and cautiously. Understanding is not a privilege of the historians. It is everybody's business. In observing the conditions of his environment everybody is a historian. Everybody uses understanding in dealing with the uncertainty of future events to which he must adjust his own actions. The distinctive reasoning of the speculator is an understanding of the relevance of the various factors determining future events. And--let us emphasize it even at this early point of our investigations--action necessarily always aims at future and therefore uncertain conditions and thus is always speculation. Acting man looks, as it were, with the eyes of a historian into the future.

#### Natural history and Human History

Cosmogony, geology, and the history of biological changes are historical disciplines as they deal with unique events of the past. However, they operate exclusively with the epistemological methods

of the natural sciences and have no need for understanding. They must sometimes take recourse to only approximate estimates of magnitudes. But such estimates are not judgments of relevance. They are a less perfect method of determining quantitative relations than is "exact" measurement. They must not be confused with the state of affairs in the field of human action which is characterized by the absence of constant relations.

If we speak of history, what we have in mind is only the history of human action, whose specific mental tool is understanding.

The assertion that modern natural science owes all its achievements to the experimental method is sometimes assailed by referring to astronomy. Now, modern astronomy is essentially an application of the physical laws, experimentally discovered on the earth, to the celestial bodies. In earlier days astronomy was mainly based on the assumption that the movements of the celestial bodies would not

change their course. Copernicus and Kepler simply tried to guess in what kind of curve the earth moves around the sun. As the circle was considered the "most perfect" curve, Copernicus chose it for his theory. Later, by similar guesswork, Kepler substituted the ellipse for the circle. Only since Newton's discoveries has astronomy become a natural science in the strict sense.

[^17]: See below, pp. 412-414.

[^18]: Cf. below, p. 351.

[^19]: Cf. A. Eddington, *The Philosophy of Physical Science* (New York, 1939), pp. 28-48.

[^20]: As this is not a dissertation on general epistemology, but the indispensable foundation of a treatise of economics, there is no need to stress the analogies between the understanding of historical relevance and the tasks to be accomplished by a diagnosing physician. The epistemology of biology is outside of the scope of our inquiries.
