### The Procedure of Economics

De scope of praxeology na de explication of de category of human action. All wey dey needed for de deduction of all praxeological theorems na knowledge of de essence of human action.  Na knowledge wey dey  our own because we be men; no being of human descent wey pathological conditions  to reduced to a merely vegetative existence lacks am. No special experience dey needed in order to comprehend dese theorems, and no experience, however rich, could disclose dem to a being who no know a priori waitin human action be. De only way to a cognition of dese theorems na logical analysis of our inherent knowledge of de category of action. We must deythink ourselves and reflect upon de structure of human action. Like logic and mathematics, praxeological knowledge say e dey in us; e no dey come from without.

All de concepts and theorems of praxeology dey implied for de category of human action. De first task na to extract and to deduce dem, to expound dia implications and to define de universal conditions of acting as such. Having shown waitin de conditions dey required by any action, one must go forda and define--of course, or a categorial and formal sense--de less general conditions required for special modes of acting. E go dey possible to deal wit dis second task by delineating all de thinkable conditions and deducing from dem all inferences logically permissible. Such an all-comprehensive system would provide a theory referring not only to human action as e dey under de conditions and circumstances given for de real world iwey man dey lives and acts. E go deal no less wit hypothetical acting dis kind go take place under de unrealizable conditions of imaginary worlds.

But de end of science na to know reality. E no dey  mental gymnastics or a logical pastime. Diafore praxeology restricts im inquiries to de study of acting under those conditions and presuppositions which dem give for reality. Im studies acting under unrealized and unrealizable conditions only from two points of view. E deals wit states of affairs which, although no dey real in de present and past world, fit possibly become real at some future date. And e examines unreal and unrealizable conditions if dis kind inquiry dey needed for a satisfactory grasp of waitin dey go on under de conditions present for reality.

Howeva, dis reference to experience no impair de aprioristic character of praxeology and economics. Experience dey merely directs our curiosity to certain problems and diverts am from oda problems. Im tells us waitin we go explore, but e no tell us how we fit proceed in our search for knowledge. Moreova, e no dey experience but thinkin alone which teaches us say, and waitin instances, e dey necessary to investigate unrealizable hypothetical conditions in order to conceive waiting dey happen for de real world.

De disutility of labor no dey categorial and aprioristic character. We fit without contradiction think of a world in which labor no dey cause uneasiness, and we fit depict de state of affairs prevailing for such a world.[^23] But de real world dey conditioned by de disutility of labor. Only theorems based on de assumption say labor na source of uneasiness wey dey applicable for de comprehension of waitin dey happen for dis world.

Experience teaches say dere is disutility of labor. But e no teach am directly. No phenomenon way introduces imself as disutility of labor. Dere are only data of experience way dey interpreted, on de ground of aprioristic knowledge, to mean say men consider leisure--i.e., de absence of labor--oda thins dey equal, as more desirable condition dan de expenditure of labor. We see say men renounce advantages wey dem fit get by working more--dat is, say dem been ready to make sacrifices for de attainment of leisure. We infer from dis fact say leisure na valued as a good and say labor dey regarded as a burden. But for previous praxeological insight, we no go ever be for de position to reach dis conclusion.

A theory of indirect exchange and all forda theories built upon am--as de theory of circulation credit--dey applicable only to de interpretation of events within a world for which indirect exchange dey practiced. In a world of barter trade only am go be mere intellectual play. E dey unlikely say de economists of dis kind world, if economic science fit get emerged at all for am, e go give any thought to de problems of indirect exchange, money, and all de rest. In our actual world, however, dis kind studies dey essential part of de economic theory.

De fact say praxeology, for fixing im eye on de comprehension of reality, concentrates upon de investigation of those problems wey dey useful for dis, no alter de aprioristic character of im reasoning. But im marks de way in which economics, up to now de only elaborated part of praxeology, presents de results of im endeavors.

Economics no dey follow de procedure of logic and mathematics. E no present de integrated system of pure aprioristic ratiocination severed from any reference to reality. For introducing assumptions into  reasoning, im satisfies imself sayde treatment of the assumptions concerned fit render useful services for de comprehension of reality. Im no strictly separate for im treatises and monographs pure science from de application of im theorems to de solution of concrete historical and political problems. Im adopts for de organized presentation of im results a form in which aprioristic theory and de interpretation of historical phenomena are intertwined.

E dey obvious say dis mode of procedure dey enjoined upon economics by de very nature and essence of itm subject matter. Im done give proof of im expediency. Howevea, one must not overlook de fact say de manipulation of dis singular and logically somewat strange procedure requires caution and subtlety, and say uncritical and superficial minds ger again and again been led astray by careless confusion of de two epistemologically different methods implied.

There are no such things as a historical method of economics or a discipline of institutional economics. There is economics and there is economic history. The two must never be confused. All theorems of economics are necessarily valid in every instance in which all the assumptions presupposed are given. Of course, they have no practical significance in situations where these conditions are not present. The theorems referring to indirect exchange are not applicable to conditions where there is no indirect exchange. But this does not impair their validity.[^24]

The issue has been obfuscated by the endeavors of governments and powerful pressure groups to disparage economics and to defame the economists. Despots and democratic majorities are drunk with power. They must reluctantly admit that they are subject to the laws of nature. But they reject the very notion of economic law. Are they not the supreme legislators? Don't they have the power to crush every opponent? No war lord is prone to acknowledge any limits other than those imposed on him by a superior armed force. Servile scribblers are always ready to foster such complacency by expounding the appropriate doctrines. They call their garbled presumptions "historical economics." In fact, economic history is a long record of government policies that failed because they were designed with a bold disregard for the laws of economics.

It is impossible to understand the history of economic thought if one does not pay attention to the fact that economics as such is a challenge to the conceit of those in power. An economist can never be a favorite of autocrats and demagogues. With them he is always the mischief-maker, and the more they are inwardly convinced that his objections are well founded, the more they hate him.

In the face of all this frenzied agitation it is expedient to establish the fact that the starting point of all praxeological and economic reasoning, the category of human action, is proof against any criticisms and objections. No appeal to any historical or empirical considerations whatever can discover any fault in the proposition that men purposefully aim at certain chosen ends. No talk about irrationality, the unfathomable depths of the human soul, the spontaneity of the phenomena of life, automatisms, reflexes, and tropisms, can invalidate the statement that man makes use of his reason for the realization of wishes and desires. From the unshakable foundation of the category of human action praxeology and economics proceed step by step by means of discursive reasoning. Precisely defining assumptions and conditions, they construct a system of concepts and draw all the inferences implied by logically unassailable ratiocination. With regard to the results thus obtained only two attitudes are possible; either one can unmask logical errors in the chain of the deductions which produced these results, or one must acknowledge their correctness and validity.

It is vain to object that life and reality are not logical. Life and reality are neither logical nor illogical; they are simply given. But logic is the only tool available to man for the comprehension of both. It is vain to object that life and history are inscrutable and ineffable and that human reason can never penetrate to their inner core. The critics contradict themselves in uttering words about the ineffable and expounding theories--of course, spurious theories--about the unfathomable. There are many things beyond the reach of the human mind. But as far as man is able to attain any knowledge, however limited, he can use only one avenue of approach, that opened by reason.

No less illusory are the endeavors to play off understanding against the theorems of economics. The domain of historical understanding is exclusively the elucidation of those problems which cannot be entirely elucidated by the nonhistorical sciences. Understanding must never contradict the theories developed by the nonhistorical sciences. Understanding can never do anything but, on the one hand, establish the fact that people were motivated by certain ideas, aimed at certain ends, and applied certain means for the attainment of these ends, and, on the other hand, assign to the various historical factors their relevance so far as this cannot be achieved by the nonhistorical sciences. Understanding does not entitle the modern historian to assert that exorcism ever was an appropriate means to cure sick cows. Neither does it permit him to maintain that an economic law was not valid in ancient Rome or in the empire of the Incas.

Man is not infallible. He searches for truth--that is, for the most adequate comprehension of reality as far as the structure of his mind and reason makes it accessible to him. Man can never become omniscient. He can never be absolutely certain that his inquiries were not misled and that what he considers as certain truth is not error. All that man can do is to submit all his theories again and again to the most critical reexamination. This means for the economist to trace back all theorems to their unquestionable and certain ultimate basis, the category of human action, and to test by the most careful scrutiny all assumptions and inferences leading from this basis to the theorem under examination. It cannot be contended that this procedure is a guarantee against error. But it is undoubtedly the most effective method of avoiding error.

Praxeology--and consequently economics too--is a deductive system. It draws its strength from the starting point of its deductions, from the category of action. No economic theorem can be considered sound that is not solidly fastened upon this foundation by an irrefutable chain of reasoning. A statement proclaimed without such a connection is arbitrary and floats in midair. It is impossible to deal with a special segment of economics if one does not encase it in a complete system of action.

The empirical sciences start from singular events and proceed from the unique and individual to the more universal. Their treatment is subject to specialization. They can deal with segments without paying attention to the whole field. The economist must never be a specialist. In dealing with any problem he must always fix his glance upon the whole system.

Historians often sin in this respect. They are ready to invent theorems ad hoc. They sometimes fail to recognize that it is impossible to abstract any causal relations from the study of complex phenomena. Their pretension to investigate reality without any reference to what they disparage as preconceived ideas is vain. In fact they unwittingly apply popular doctrines long since unmasked as fallacious and contradictory.

[^23]: See below, pp. 131-133

[^24]: Cf. F.H. Knight, *The Ethics of Competition and Other Essays* (New York, 1935), p. 139.
