### The Prerequisites of Human Action

We call contentment or satisfaction that state of a human being which does not and cannot result in any action. Acting man is eager to substitute a more satisfactory state of affairs for a less satisfactory. His mind imagines conditions which suit him better, and his action aims at bringing about this desired state. The incentive that impels a man to act is always some uneasiness[^1]. A man perfectly content with the state of his affairs would have no incentive to change things. He would have neither wishes nor desires; he would be perfectly happy. He would not act; he would simply live free from care.

But to make a man act, uneasiness and the image of a more satisfactory state alone are not sufficient. A third condition is required: the expectation that purposeful behavior has the power to remove or at least to alleviate the felt uneasiness. In the absence of this condition no action is feasible. Man must yield to the inevitable. He must submit to destiny.

These are the general conditions of human action. Man is the being that lives under these conditions. He is not only _homo sapiens_, but no less _homo agens_. Beings of human descent who either from birth or from acquired defects are unchangeably unfit for any action (in the strict sense of the term and not merely in the legal sense) are practically not human. Although the statutes and biology consider them to be men, they lack the essential feature of humanity. The newborn child too is not an acting being. It has not yet gone the whole way from conception to the full development of its human qualities. But at the end of this evolution it becomes an acting being.

#### On Happiness

In colloquial speech we call a man "happy" who has succeeded in attaining his ends. A more adequate description of his state would be that he is happier than he was before. There is however no valid objection to a usage that defines human action as the striving for happiness.

But we must avoid current misunderstandings. The ultimate goal of human action is always the satisfaction of the acting man's desire. There is no standard of greater or lesser satisfaction other than individual judgments of value, different for various people and for the same people at various times. What makes a man feel uneasy and less uneasy is established by him from the standard of his own will and judgment, from his personal and subjective valuation. Nobody is in a position to decree what should make a fellow man happier.

To establish this fact does not refer in any way to the antitheses of egoism and altruism, of materialism and idealism, of individualism and collectivism, of atheism and religion. There are people whose only aim is to improve the condition of their own ego. There are other people with whom awareness of the troubles of their fellow men causes as much uneasiness as or even more uneasiness than their own wants. There are people who desire nothing else than the satisfaction of their appetites for sexual intercourse, food, drinks, fine homes, and other material things. But other men care more for the satisfactions commonly called "higher" and "ideal." There are individuals eager to adjust their actions to the requirements of social cooperation; there are, on the other hand, refractory people who defy the rules of social life. There are people for whom the ultimate goal of the earthly pilgrimage is the preparation for a life of bliss. There are other people who do not believe in the teachings of any religion and do not allow their actions to be influenced by them.

Praxeology is indifferent to the ultimate goals of action. Its findings are valid for all kinds of action irrespective of the ends aimed at. It is a science of means, not of ends. It applies the term happiness in a purely formal sense. In the praxeological terminology the proposition: man's unique aim is to attain happiness, is tautological. It does not imply any statement about the state of affairs from which man expects happiness.

The idea that the incentive of human activity is always some uneasiness and its aim always to remove such uneasiness as far as possible, that is, to make the acting men feel happier, is the essence of the teachings of Eudaemonism and Hedonism. Epicurean ἀταραξία is that state of perfect happiness and contentment at which all human activity aims without ever wholly attaining it. In the face of the grandeur of this cognition it is of little avail only that many representatives of this philosophy failed to recognize the purely formal character of the notions _pain_ and _pleasure_ and gave them a material and carnal meaning. The theological, mystical, and other schools of a heteronomous ethic did not shake the core of Epicureanism because they could not raise any other objection than its neglect of the "higher" and "nobler" pleasures. It is true that the writings of many earlier champions of Eudaemonism, Hedonism, and Utilitarianism are in some points open to misinterpretation. But the language of modern philosophers and still more that of the modern economists is so precise and straightforward that no misinterpretation can possibly occur.

#### On Instincts and Impulses

One does not further the comprehension of the fundamental problem of human action by the methods of instinct-sociology. This school classifies the various concrete goals of human action and assigns to each class a special instinct as its motive. Man appears as a being driven by various innate instincts and dispositions. It is assumed that this explanation demolishes once for all the odious teachings of economics and utilitarian ethics. However, Feuerbach has already justly observed that every instinct is an instinct to happiness[^2]. The method of instinct-psychology and instinct-sociology consists in an arbitrary classification of the immediate goals of action and in a hypostasis of each. Whereas praxeology says that the goal of an action is to remove a certain uneasiness, instinct-psychology says it is the satisfaction of an instinctive urge.

Many champions of the instinct school are convinced that they have proved that action is not determined by reason, but stems from the profound depths of innate forces, impulses, instincts, and dispositions which are not open to any rational elucidation. They are certain they have succeeded in exposing the shallowness of rationalism and disparage economics as "a tissue of false conclusions drawn from false psychological assumptions."[^3]

Person wey act under emotional impulse still dey act. De thing wey distinguish emotional action  from other actions  na de valuation  of input and output. Emotion disarrange valuations. Inflamed with passion, man see de goal as more desirable and de price e has to pay for am as less burdensome pass how e go do am for cool deliberation. Men never ever doubt say even for de state of emotion means and ends dey pondered and say e  dey possible make dem influence de outcome of dis deliberation  by rendering more costly de yielding to de passionate impulse. To punish criminal offenses wey dem commit for state of emotional excitement abi intoxication wey dey mildly pass other offenses dey tantamount to encouraging that kin excesses. De threat of severe retaliation nor fail to deter even people drive by seemingly irresistible passion.

We interpret animal behavior on de assumption  say animals dey yield to impulse  wey prevail at de moment. As we observe say de animal feeds, cohabits, and attacks other animals or men, we speak of im instincts of nourishment, of reproduction, and of aggression. We assume say dat kin instincts dey innate and peremptorily ask for satisfaction.

But e dey different with man. Man nor be being wey fit help yielding to de impulse say most of dem urgently  asks for satisfaction. Man na being wey dey capable to subdue im instincts, emotions, and impulses; e fit rationalise im behaviour. E renounce de satisfaction of a burning impulse so dat e go satisfy other desires. E nor be puppet of im appetites. Man nor dey ravish every female wey stir im senses; e nor fit devour every piece of food wey entice am; e nor fit knock down every fellow wey e go like to kill. E arrange im wishes and desires for scale, e choose; in short, e dey act. Wetin distinguish man from beast na precisely say im adjust im behaviour deliberatively. Man na de being wey get inhibitions, wey fit master im impulses and desires, wey get power to suppress instinctive desires and impulses.

E fit happen say impulse  fit emerge with dat kin vehemence say nor disadvantage wey im satisfaction fit cause appear great enough to prevent de Individual from say im go satisfy am. For dis case too, choosing dey. Man decide in favour of yielding to de desire wey e dey concerned about.[^5]

[^1]: Cf. Lock, _An Essay Concerning Human Understanding_, ed. Fraser (Oxford, 1894), I, 331-333; Leibniz, _Nouveaux essais sur l'entendement humain_, ed. Fammarion, p. 119.

[^2]: Cf. Feuerbach, _Sämmtliche Werke_, ed. Bolin and Jodl (Stuttgart, 1907), X, 231.

[^3]: Cf. William McDougall, _An Introduction to Social Psychology_ (14th ed. Boston, 1921), p. 11.

[^4]: Cf. Mises, _Epistemological Problems of Economics_, trans. by G. Reisman (New York, 1960), pp. 52 ff.

[^5]: For dat kind case, dem play great role by de circumstances wey de two satisfaction concerned- wey  dey expected from yielding  to de online  and wey dey expected  from de avoidance  of im undesirable consequences- nor dey simultaneous. Cf. below, pp. 479-490.
