### On Ideal Types

History dey deals wit unique and unrepeatable events, wit de irreversible flux of human affairs. A historical event no fit described without de reference to de persons involved and to de place and date of im occurrence. As far as e happening fit be narrated without dis kind a reference, no be a historical event but a fact of de natural sciences. De report wey Professor ::X:: on February 20, 1945, performed a certain experiment for im laboratory na account of a historical event. De physicist believes say im dey right for abstracting from de person of de experimenter and de date and place of de experiment. Im relates only those circumstances wey, for im opinion, dey relevant for de production of de result achieved and, wen repeated, go produce de same result again. Im transforms de historical event into a fact of de empirical natural sciences. Im disregards de active interference of de experimenter and tries to imagine im as an indifferent observer and relater of unadulterated reality. No be de task of praxeology to deal wit de epistemological issues of dis philosophy.

Although unique and unrepeatable, historical events get one common feature: dem be human action. History comprehends dem as human actions; e conceives dia meaning by de instrumentality of praxeological cognition and understands dia meaning in looking at dia individual and unique features. Waitin counts for history dey always de meaning of de men concerned: de meaning wey dem attach to de state of affairs dem want to alter, de meaning dem attach to dia actions, and de meaning dem attach to de effects produced by de actions.

De aspect from which history arranges and assorts de infinite multiplicity of events na dia meaning. De only principle wey im applies for de systemization of im objects--men, ideas, institutions, social entities, and artifacts--na meaning affinity. According to meaning affinity im arranges de elements into ideal types.

Ideal types dey specific notions employed for historical research and for de representation of im results. Dem be concepts of understanding. As such dem dey entirely different from praxeological categories and concepts and from de concepts of de natural sciences. An ideal type no be class concept, because e description does not indicate de marks wey presence definitely and unambiguously determines class membership. An ideal type no fit dey defined: e must be characterized by an enumeration of those features wey presence by and large decides whether for concrete instance we are or are not faced wit a specimen belonging to de ideal type in question. E dey peculiar to de ideal type dat not all im characteristics need to be present for any one example. Whether or not de absence of some characteristics prevents de inclusion of a concrete specimen for de ideal type in question, depends on a relevance judgment by understanding. De ideal type imself na outcome of an understanding of de motives, ideas, and aims of de acting individuals and of de means dem apply.

An ideal type get nothing at all to do wit statistical means and averages. Most of de characteristics concerned no dey open to a numerical determination, and for dis reason alone dem fit no enter into calculation of averages. But de main reason na to be seen for something else. Statistical averages denote de behavior of de members of a class or a type, already constituted by means of a definition or characterization referring to oda marks, wit regard to features not referred to for de definition or characterization. de membership of de class or type must be known before de statistician fit start investigating special features and use de result of dis investigation for de establishment of an average. We fit establish de average age of de United States Senators or we fit reckon averages concerning de behavior of an age class of de population wit regard to a special problem. But e dey logically impossible to make de membership of a class or type depend upon an average.

No historical problem fit be treated without de aid of ideal types. Even wen de historian deals wit an individual person or wit a single event, im no fit avoid referring to ideal types. If im speaks of Napoleon, im must refer to such ideal types as commander, dictator, revolutionary leader; and if im deals wit de French Revolution im must refer to ideal types such as revolution, disintegration of an established regime, anarchy. Im fit be say de reference to an ideal type consists merely in rejecting im applicability to de case in question. But all historical events dey described and interpreted by means of ideal types. De layman too, in dealing wit events of de past or of de future, must always make use of ideal types and unwittingly always does so.

Wheda or not de employment of a definite ideal type dey expedient and conducive to an adequate grasp of phenomena fit only be decided by understanding. No be de ideal type wey determines de mode of understanding; Na de mode of understanding wey requires de construction and use of corresponding ideal types.

De ideal types dey constructed wit de use of ideas and concepts developed by all nonhistorical branches of knowledge. Every cognition of history na, of course, conditioned by de findings of de oda sciences, depends upon dem, and must never contradict dem. But historical knowledge get anoda subject matter and anoda method dan these oda sciences, and dem in turn get no use for understanding. Thus de ideal types must not be confused wit concepts of de nonhistorical sciences. Dis dey valid also wit regard to de praxeological categories and concepts. Dem provide, to be sure, de indispensable mental tools for de study of history. Howeva, dem no refer to de understanding of de unique and individual events wey dem de subject matter of history. An ideal type fit therefore neva be a simple adoption of a praxeological concept.

E happens for many instances dat a term used by praxeology to signify a praxeological concept serves to signify an ideal type for de historian. Den de historian uses one word for de expression of two different thins. Im applies de term sometimes to signify im praxeological connotation, but more often to signify an ideal type. For de latter case de historian attaches to de word a meaning different from im praxeological meaning; he transforms am by transferring am to a different field of inquiry. De economic concept "entrepreneur" belongs to a stratum oda dan de ideal type "entrepreneur" as used by economic history and descriptive economics. (On a third stratum lies de legal term "entrepreneur.") De economic term "entrepreneur" na precisely defined concept which in the framework of a theory of market economy signifies a clearly integrated function.[^21] De historical ideal type "entrepreneur" does not include de same members. Nobody in using it thinks of shoe-shine boys, cab drivers who own their cars, small businessmen, and small farmers. Waitin economics establishes wit regard to entrepreneurs dey rigidly valid for all members of de class witout any regard to temporal and geographical conditions and to de various branches of business. Waitin economic history establishes for im ideal types fit differ according to de particular circumstances of various ages, countries, branches of business, and many other conditions. History get small use for a general ideal type of entrepreneur. E dey more concerned wit such types as: de American entrepreneur of de time of Jefferson, German heavy industries or de age of William II, New England textile manufacturing for de last decades preceding de first World War, de Protestant haute finance of Paris, self-made entrepreneurs, and so on.

Whether the use of a definite ideal type is to be recommended or not depends entirely on the mode of understanding. lt is quite common nowadays to employ two ideal types: Left-Wing Parties (Progressives) and Right*Wing Parties (Fascists). The former includes the Western democracies, some Latin American dictatorships, and Russian Bolshevism; the latter Italian Fascism and German Nazism. This typification is the outcome of a definite mode of understanding. Another mode would contrast Democracy and Dictatorship. Then Russian Bolshevism, Italian Fascism, and German Nazism belong to the ideal type of dictatorial government, and the Western systems to the ideal type of democratic government.

It was a fundamental mistake of the Historical School of *Wirtschaftliche Staatswissenshaften* in Germany and of Institutionalism in America to interpret economics as the characterization of the behavior of an ideal type, the *homo oeconomicus*. According to this doctrine traditional or orthodox economics does not deal with the behavior of man as he really is and acts, but with a fictitious or hypothetical image. It pictures a being driven exclusively by "economic" motives, i.e., solely by the intention of making the greatest possible material or monetary profit. Such a being, say these critics, does not have and never did have a counterpart in reality; it is a phantom of a spurious armchair philosophy. No man is exclusively motivated by the desire to become as rich as possible; many are not at all influenced by this mean craving. It is vain to refer to such an illusory homunculus in dealing with life and history.

Even if this really were the meaning of classical economics, the homo oeconomicus would certainly not be an ideal type. The ideal type is not an embodiment of one side or aspect of man's various aims and desires. It is always the representation of complex phenomena of reality, either of men, of institutions, or of ideologies.

The classical economist sought to explain the formation of prices. They were fully aware of the fact that prices are not a product of the activities of a special group of people, but the result of an interplay of all members of the market society. This was the meaning of their statement that demand and supply determine the formation of prices. However, the classical economists failed in their endeavors to provide a satisfactory theory of value. They were at a loss to find a solution for the apparent paradox of value. They were puzzled by the alleged paradox that "gold" is more highly valued than "iron," although the latter is more "useful" than the former. Thus they could not construct a general theory of value and could not trace back the phenomena of market exchange and of production to their ultimate sources, the behavior of the consumers. This shortcoming forced them to abandon their ambitious plan to develop a general theory of human action. They had to satisfy themselves with a theory explaining only the activities of the businessman without going back to the choices of everybody as the ultimate determinants. They dealt only with the actions of businessmen eager to buy in the cheapest market and to sell in the dearest. The consumer was left outside the field of their theorizing. Later the epigones of classical economics explained and justified this insufficiency as an intentional and methodologically necessary procedure. It was, they asserted, the deliberate design of economists to restrict their investigations to only one aspect of human endeavor--namely, to the "economic" aspect. It was their intention to use the fictitious image of a man driven solely by "economic" motives and to neglect all others although they were fully aware of the fact that real men are driven by many other, "noneconomic" motives. To deal with these other motives, one group of these interpreters maintained, is not the task of economics but of other branches of knowledge. Another group admitted that the treatment of these "noneconomic" motives and their influence on the formation of prices was a task of economics also, but they believed that it must be left to later generations. It will be shown at a later stage of our investigations that this distinction between "economic" and "noneconomic" motives of human action is untenable.[^22] At this point it is only important to realize that this doctrine of the "economic" side of human action utterly misrepresents the teachings of the classical economists. They never intended to do what this doctrine ascribes to them. They wanted to conceive the real formation of prices--not fictitious prices as they would be determined if men were acting under the sway of hypothetical conditions different from those really influencing them. The prices they try to explain and do explain--although without tracing them back to the choices of the consumers--are real market prices. The demand and supply of which they speak are real factors determined by all motives instigating men to buy or to sell. What was wrong with their theory was that they did not trace demand back to the choices of the consumers; they lacked a satisfactory theory of demand. But it was not their idea that demand as they used this concept in their dissertations was exclusively determined by "economic" motives as distinguished from "noneconomic" motives. As they restricted their theorizing to the actions of businessmen, they did not deal with the motives of the ultimate consumers. Nonetheless their theory of prices was intended as an explanation of real prices irrespective of the motives and ideas instigating the consumers.

Modern subjective economics starts with the solution of the apparent paradox of value. It neither limits its theorems to the actions of businessmen alone nor deals with a fictitious homo oeconomicus. It treats the inexorable categories of everybody's action. Its theorems concerning commodity prices, wage rates, and interest rates refer to all these phenomena without any regard to the motives causing people to buy or to sell or to abstain from buying or selling. It is time to discard entirely any reference to the abortive attempt to justify the shortcoming of older economists through the appeal to the homo oeconomicus phantom.

[^21]: See below, pp. 251-255.

[^22]: See below, pp. 232-234 and 239-244.
