## De Barter-Fiction of dd Elementary Theory of Value and Prices

De elaboration of economic theory dey heuristically dependent on de logical processes of reckoning to such an extent say de economists don fail to realize de fundamental problem wey dey involved for de  methods of economic calculation. Dem bin dey prone to take economic calculation as a matter of course; dem nor see say e nor be ultimate given, but a derivative wey dey require reduction to more elementary phenomena. Dem misconstrue economic calculation. Dem take am as category of all human action and ignore de fact say na only category inherent in acting under special conditions. Dem dey fully aware of de fact say interpersonal exchange, and consequently market exchange effected by de intermediary of a common medium of exchange--money, and as e be prices, na special features of a certain state of society's economic organization wey be nor exist for primitive civilizations and fit possibly disappear for further course of historical change[^1]. But dem nor understand say money prices na de only vehicle of economic calculation. So most of dia studies dey of little use. Even de writings of de most eminent economists dey vitiated to some extent by de fallacies implied in dia ideas wey concern economic calculation.

De modern theory of value and prices dey show how de choices of individuals, de way dem dey prefer some things and setting aside of oda things, dey result, for de sphere of interpersonal exchange,for de emergence of market prices[^2]. Dese masterful expositions dey unsatisfactory in some minor points and disfigured by unsuitable expressions. But dem dey essentially irrefutable. As far as dem need to dey amended, e gats dey done by a consistent elaboration of de fundamental thoughts of dia authors rather dan by a refutation of dia reasoning.

In order to trace back de phenomena of de market to de universal category of preferring ::a:: to ::b::, dd elementary theory of value and prices dey bound to use some imaginary constructions. De use of imaginary constructions wey notin dey correspond to am for reality na indispensable tool of tinking. No oda method for contribute anytin to de interpretation of reality. But one of de most important problems of science na to avoid de fallacies wey ill-considered employment of such constructions fit entail.

De elementary theory of value and prices dey use , apart from oda imaginary constructions wey we go deal wit later[^3], de construction of a market wey all transactions dey performed for direct exchange. Money nor dey; goods and services dey directly bartered against oda goods and services. Dis imaginary construction dey necessary. Person gats disregard de intermediary role wey money dey play in order to realize say wetin dey ultimately exchanged na always economic goods of de first order against oda goods like am. Money na notin but medium of interpersonal exchange. But person gats carefully guard eself against de delusions wey dis construction of  market with direct exchange fit easily cause.

A serious blunder wey get e origin and e tenacity to a misinterpretation of dis imaginary construction na de assumption say de medium of exchange na neutral factor only. According to dis opinion de only difference between direct and indirect exchange na say only for de last one na medium of exchange dey used. De interpolation of money into de transaction, as dem talk am, nor affect de main features of de business. Person nor ignore de fact say for de course of history tremendous alterations for de purchasing power of money don occur and say dese fluctuations often dey convulse de whole system of exchange. But e dey believed say dose kind events na exceptional facts wey dey happen cause of inappropriate policies. Only "bad" money, dem talk, fit bring about such disarrangements. In addition people dey misunderstand de causes and effects of dese disturbances. Dem tacitly assume say changes for purchasing power occur wit regard to all goods and services at de same time and to de same extent. Dis na, of course, wetin  de fable of money's neutrality dey imply. De whole theory of catallactics, dem believe, fit dey elaborated under de assumption say na only direct exchange dey. If dis dey once achieved, de only tin to be added na de "simple" insertion of money terms into de complex of theorems concerning direct exchange. Howeva, dis final completion of de catallactic system bin dey considered of minor importance only. E nor dey only believed say e fit alter anytin essential for de structure of economic teachings. De main task of economics dey conceived as de study of direct exchange. Wetin remain to be done besides this was at best only a scrutiny of the problems of "bad" money.

Complying wit dis opinion, economists come neglect to lay due stress for de problems of indirect exchange. Dia treatment of monetary problems dey superficial; e dey only loosely connected wit de main body of dia scrutiny of de market process. About de beginning of de twentieth century de problems of indirect exchange dey much relegated to a subordinate place. Treatises dey on catallactics wey dey deal only incidentally and cursorily wit money matas, and books dey on currency and banking wey nor even attempt to integrate dia subject into de structure of catallactic system. At de universities of de Anglo-Saxon countries separate chairs for economics and for currency and banking dey, and for most of de German universities money problems dey almost entirely sidelined[^4]. Only later economists come realize say some of de most important and most intricate problems of catallactics dey for de field of indirect exchange and say economic theory wey nor dey pay full regard to dem dey lamentably defective. De coming into vogue of investigations concerning de relation between de "natural rate of interest" and de "money rate of interest," de ascendancy of de monetary theory of de trade cycle, and de entire demolition of de doctrine of de simultaneousness and evenness of de changes for de purchasing power of money bin mark de start of de new tenor of economic thought. Of course, dese new ideas bin dey essentially a continuation of de work gloriously begun by David Hume, de British Currency School, John Stuart Mill and Cairnes.

Still more detrimental was a second error which emerged from the careless use of the imaginary construction of a market with direct exchange.

An inveterate fallacy asserted that things and services exchanged are of equal value. Value was considered as objective, as an intrinsic quality inherent in things and not merely as the expression of various people's eagerness to acquire them. People, it was assumed, first established the magnitude of value proper to goods and services by an act of measurement and then proceeded to barter them against quantities of goods and services of the same amount of value. This fallacy frustrated Aristotle's approach to economic problems and, for almost two thousand years, the reasoning of all those for whom Aristotle's opinions were authoritative. It seriously vitiated the marvelous achievements of the classical economists and rendered the writings of their epigones, especially those of Marx and the Marxian school, entirely futile. The basis of modern economics is the cognition that it is precisely the disparity in the value attached to the objects exchanged that results in their being exchanged. People buy and sell only because they appraise the things given up less than those received. Thus the notion of a measurement of value is vain. An act of exchange is neither preceded nor accompanied by any process which could be called a measuring of value. An individual may attach the same value to two things; but then no exchange can result. But if there is a diversity in valuation, all that can be asserted with regard to it is that one ::a:: is valued higher, that it is preferred to one ::b::. Values and valuations are intensive quantities and not extensive quantities. They are not susceptible to mental grasp by the application of cardinal numbers.

However, the spurious idea that values are measurable and are really measured in the conduct of economic transactions was so deeply rooted that even eminent economists fell victim to the fallacy implied. Even Friedrich von Wieser and Irving Fisher took it for granted that there must be something like measurement of value and that economics must be able to indicate and to explain the method by which such measurement is effected[^5]. Most of the lesser economists simply maintained that money serves "as a measure of values."

Now, we must realize that valuing means to prefer ::a:: to ::b::. There is --logically, epistemologically, psychologically, and praxeologically--only one pattern of preferring. It does not matter whether a love prefers one girl to other girls, a man one friend to other people, an amateur one painting to other paintings, or a consumer a loaf of bread to a piece of candy. Preferring always means to love or to desire ::a:: more than ::b::. Just as there is no standard and no measurement of sexual love, of friendship and sympathy, and of aesthetic enjoyment, so there is no measurement of the value of commodities. If a man exchanges two pounds of butter for a shirt, all that we can assert with regard to this transaction is that he--at the instant of the transaction and under the conditions which this instant offers to him--prefers one shirt to two pounds of butter. It is certain that every act of preferring is characterized by a definite psychic intensity of the feelings it implies. There are grades in the intensity of the desire to attain a definite goal and this intensity determines the psychic profit which the successful action brings to the acting individual. But psychic quantities can only be felt. They are entirely personal, and there is no semantic means to express their intensity and to convey information about them to other people.

There is no method available to construct a unit of value. Let us remember that two units of a homogeneous supply are necessarily valued differently. The value attached to the nth unit is lower than that attached to the ::(n - 1)::th unit.

In the market society there are money prices. Economic calculation is calculation in terms of money prices. The various quantities of goods and services enter into this calculation with the amount of money for which they are bought and sold on the market or for which they could prospectively be bought and sold. It is a fictitious assumption that an isolated self-sufficient individual or the general manager of a socialist system, i.e., a system in which there is no market for means of production, could calculate. There is no way which could lead one from the money computation of a market economy to any kind of computation in a nonmarket system.

#### The Theory of Value and Socialism

Socialists, Institutionalists and the Historical School have blamed economists for having employed the imaginary construction of an isolated individual's thinking and acting. This Robinson Crusoe pattern, it is asserted, is of no use for the study of the conditions of a market economy. The rebuke is somewhat justified. Imaginary constructions of an isolated individual and of a planned economy without market exchange become utilizable only through the implication of the fictitious assumption, self-contradictory in thought and contrary to reality, that economic calculation is possible also within a system without a market for the means of production.

It was certainly a serious blunder that economists did not become aware of this difference between the conditions of a market economy and a nonmarket economy. Yet the socialists had little reason for criticizing this fault. For it consisted precisely in the fact that the economists tacitly implied the assumption that a socialist order of society could also resort to economic calculation and that they thus asserted the possibility of the realization of the socialist plans.

The classical economists and their epigones could not, of course, recognize the problems involved. If it were true that the value of things is determined by the quantity of labor required for their production or reproduction, then there is no further problem of economic calculation. The supporters of the labor theory of value cannot be blamed for having misconstrued the problems of a socialist system. Their fateful failure was their untenable doctrine of value. That some of them were ready to consider the imaginary construction of a socialist economy as a useful and realizable pattern for a thorough reform of social organization did not contradict the essential content of their theoretical analysis. But it was different with subjective catallactics. It was unpardonable for the modern economists to have failed to recognize the problems involved.

Wieser was right when he once declared that many economists have unwittingly dealt with the value theory of communism and have on that account neglected to elaborate that of the present state of society[^6]. It is tragic that he himself did not avoid this failure.

The illusion that a rational order of economic management is possible in a society based on public ownership of the means of production owed its origin to the value theory of the classical economists and its tenacity to the failure of many modern economists to think through consistently to its ultimate conclusions the fundamental theorem of the subjectivist theory. Thus the socialist utopias were generated and preserved by the shortcomings of those schools of thought which the Marxians reject as "an ideological disguise of the selfish class interest of the exploiting bourgeoisie." In truth it was the errors of these schools that made the socialist ideas thrive. This fact clearly demonstrates the emptiness of the Marxian teachings concerning "ideologies" and its modern offshoot, the sociology of knowledge.


[^1]: The German Historical School expressed this by asserting that private ownership of the means of production, market exchange, and money are "historical categories."

[^2]: Cf. especially Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, *Kapital und Kapitalzins*, Pt. II, Bk. III.

[^3]: See below, pp. 236-256.

[^4]: Neglect of the problems of indirect exchange was certainly influenced by political prepossessions. People did not want to give up the thesis according to which economic depressions are an evil inherent in the capitalist mode of production and are in no way caused by attempts to lower the rate of interest by credit expansion. Fashionable teachers of economics deemed it "unscientific" to explain depressions as a phenomenon originating "only" out of events in the sphere of money and credit. There were even surveys of the history of business cycle theory which omitted any discussion of the monetary thesis. Cf., e.g., Eugen von Bergmann, *Geschichte der nationalokonomischen Krisentheorien* (Stuttgart, 1895).

[^5]: For a critical analysis and refutation of Fisher's argument, cf. Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, trans. by H. E. Batson (London, 1934), pp. 42-44; for the same with regard to Wieser's argument, Mises, *Nationalokonomie* (Geneva, 1940), pp. 192-194.

[^6]: Cf. Friedrich von Wieser, *Der naturliche Wert* (Vienna, 1889), p. 60, n. 3.
