## Against Fiduciary Media

Quase todos economistas Austríacos contemporâneos estão unidos em sua oposição à centralização bancária e em seu apoio ao sistema de competição bancária livre. Todavia, um debate vigoroso ergueu-se sobre o significado preciso de "competição bancária livre". Será que "livre" requer 100 porcento de reserva-depósito, ou será que permite ou até requisite reserva fracionária? Em um recente artigo que apareceu na *Revisão da Economia Austríaca*, George A. Selgin e Lawrence White, os dois mais proeminentes Austríacos contemporâneos propositores do "free banking" como reserva fracionária, haviam se encarregado de uma tentativa sistemática para responder seus numerosos críticos Austríacos e defensores de 100 porcento de reserva-depósito bancária. <sup id="fnref:1"><a href="#fn:1" class="footnote-ref">1<1></p> 

<p>
  Contra as acusações feitas por seus críticos, Selgin e White tentam estabelecer duas teses. First, they claim to show that the practice of fractional reserve banking, that is, the issue of fiduciary media, does not constitute fraud but is justified by the principle of freedom of contract, and in particular they contend that fractional reserve banking is in accordance with the title-transfer theory of contract as developed by Murray N. Rothbard (such that Rothbard, who holds that fractional reserve banking is fraudulent, must have failed to grasp his own theory). Second, they attempt to show that the creation of fiduciary media does not of necessity lead to economic inefficiencies and discoordination but may actually help prevent an otherwise unavoidable crisis and thus improve economic performance. In the following, we will demonstrate that neither the central normative claim nor the secondary positive claim is established.<fnref target="2" />
</p>

<h3>
  The Issue of Fraud I: Money, Money Substitutes, Fiduciary Media, and the Title-Transfer Theory of Contract
</h3>

<p>
  In order to resolve the question of whether or not fractional reserve banking constitutes fraud, from the outset a few factual assumptions and terminological issues will have to be clarified. Fortunately almost complete agreement on these matters exists on both sides of the debate, and thus we can be extremely brief. Money cannot but originate as a commodity, such as gold. Gold, then, as money is defined as “the generally acceptable medium of exchange,” and as such is uniquely characterized by its “supreme salability in comparison with all other assets” (such that its “possession puts one in the position of being able to make any potential purchase with minimum inconvenience”).<fnref target="3" /> Money substitutes, in turn, are defined as claims or titles to specified amounts of money gold. If money substitutes (paper notes) are fully covered by reserves of money (gold), Mises denotes them “money certificates,” and we will refer to them here simply as money substitutes. If money substitutes (paper notes) are uncovered by money (gold), they will be referred to as fiduciary media instead.<fnref target="4" />
</p>

<p>
  Based on these assumptions and definitions, we can now turn to the question of whether or not the issue of fiduciary media constitutes fraud. Fortunately the discussion of this issue is facilitated by the fact that Selgin and White explicitly accept the Rothbardian titletransfer theory of contract. That the issue of fiduciary media is inherently fraudulent, as Rothbard and Hoppe claim, Selgin and White find
</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    impossible to reconcile with Rothbard’s … title-transfer-theory of contract which we accept, and which Rothbard otherwise uses to defend the freedom of mutually consenting individuals to engage in capitalist acts with their (justly owned) property. Rothbard defines fraud as “failure to fulfill a voluntarily-agreed-upon transfer of property.” Fractional-reserve arrangements cannot then be <em>inherently</em> or <em>inescapably</em> fraudulent. Whether a particular bank is committing fraud by holding fractional reserves must depend on the terms of the title-transfer agreements between the bank and its customers.<fnref target="5" /> …
  </p>
  
  <p>
    Whether it is fraudulent to hold fractional reserves against a bank liability does not depend <em>per se</em> on whether it is a demand or time liability, but only on whether the bank has misrepresented itself as holding 100 percent reserves. The demandability of a particular claim issued by a bank, i.e., the holder’s contractual option to redeem it at any time, is not <em>per se</em> a representation that the bank is holding 100 percent reserves against the total of its demandable claims. Rothbard argues otherwise, based on the view that a bank’s demand deposits and notes are necessarily “warehouse receipts” and not debts. We do not see why bank and customer cannot contractually agree to make them debts and not warehouse receipts, and we believe that historically they have so agreed.<fnref target="6" />
  </p>
</blockquote>

<p>
  While this may sound plausible at first glance, it does not withstand serious scrutiny. In fact, the quoted passage reveals that the most basic lesson concerning property and contract has been overlooked. As Hoppe formulated it, “two individuals cannot be the exclusive owner of one and the same thing at the same time.”<fnref target="7" /> This is an immutable principle; it is a law of action and nature that no contract can change or invalidate. Rather, any contractual agreement that involves presenting two different individuals as simultaneous owners of the same thing (or alternatively, the same thing as simultaneously owned by more than one person) is objectively false and thus fraudulent.<fnref target="8" /> Yet this is precisely what a fractional-reserve agreement between bank and customer involves.
</p>

<p>
  In issuing and accepting a fiduciary note (at a necessarily discounted price), both bank and customer have <em>in fact</em>, regardless of whatever they may believe or think about the transaction, agreed to represent themselves—fraudulently—as the owner of one and the same object at the same time. They have in fact contracted to create additional titles and claims to the same existing quantity of property. In issuing fiduciary notes, they do not—and cannot—bring more property into existence. Indeed, no contract whatsoever can possibly increase the existing quantity of property, but can only transfer (redistribute) existing property from one person to another. The quantity of existing property can only be increased through additional appropriation and production (and a thus enlarged quantity of property can in turn lead to a correspondingly increased number of titles to property). But fractional reserve banking and the issue of fiduciary media, while it does not and cannot increase the amount of property in existence, also does not involve (as all other contracts do) a transfer of existing property or titles to existing property from one hand to another. Neither does the issue and acceptance of a fiduciary note signify a transfer of property from bank to client or vice versa. To be sure, as the result of a fiduciary issue, the distribution of assets and liabilities in the accounts of bank and client is altered. But no existing quantity of property is actually transferred from bank to client, or vice versa, and the total quantity of property in existence has remained unchanged. Rather, fiduciary media represent new and additional titles to or claims on an existing and unchanged stock of property. They are not the result and documented outcome of an additional supply of property on the part of the bank or its client. Instead, they represent an additional supply of property titles, while the supply of <em>property</em> has remained constant. It is precisely in this sense that it can be said of fiduciary media that they are created out of thin air. They are property-less titles in search of property. This, in and of itself, constitutes fraud, whether according to Rothbard’s definition of the term as “a failure to fulfill a voluntarily-agreed-upon transfer of property” or according to Selgin and White’s own definition of it as “a <em>willful</em> or <em>deliberate</em> deception for purposes of gain.” Each issuer and buyer of a fiduciary note (a title to money uncovered by money), regardless of what he may believe, is in fact—objectively—engaged in a misrepresentation for the purpose of personal gain. The bank and its client have consented to misrepresent themselves as the owners of a quantity of property that they do not own and that plainly does not exist; and whenever they buy an existing quantity of property in exchange for titles to a nonexisting quantity of property, they have become invariably and inescapably guilty of an act of fraudulent appropriation.<fnref target="9" />
</p>

<footnotes>
  <fn name="1">
    <p>
      George Selgin and Lawrence White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media—or, We are Not Devo(lutionists), We are Misesians!” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 9 no. 2 (1996): 83–107.
    </p>
    
    <p>
      Curiously, in the reply to their various critics, Selgin and White selected as their central target an article by Hans-Hermann Hoppe (“How is Fiat Money Possible?—or, The Devolution of Money and Credit,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 7, no. 2 (1994): 49–74, that deals only cursorily with their position. Other Austrian critics of fractional reserve banking explicitly dealt with in Selgin and White’s article including Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” in <em>Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard</em>, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988) and Jesús Huerta de Soto, “A Critical Analysis of Central Banks and Fractional-Reserve Free Banking from the Austrian Perspective,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 8, no. 2 (1995): 25–36\. Murray N. Rothbard, the most prominent critic of fractional reserve banking, is targeted only indirectly; and although several of his works are mentioned in their bibliography, Rothbard’s later writings on the subject (“The Myth of Free Banking in Scotland,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 2 [1988]: 229–57; idem, “Aurophobia: or, Free Banking on What Standard?” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em>, 6, no. 1 [1992]: 97–108; idem, “The Present State of Austrian Economics,” <em>Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines</em> 6, no. 2 [1995]) are not mentioned. Likewise ignored entirely are the criticisms by Joseph T. Salerno (“Two Traditions in Modern Monetary Theory: John Law and A.R.J. Turgot,” <em>Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines</em> 2, no. 2/3 [1991]; idem, “The Concept of Coordination in Austrian Macroeconomics,” in <em>Austrian Economics: Perspectives on the Past and Prospects for the Future</em>, Richard Ebeling, ed. [Hillsdale, Mich.: Hillsdale College Press, 1991]; and idem, “Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 6, no. 2 [1993]: 113–46). Selgin and White also do not address, and in this case could not have done so, the most recent and most extensive criticism of their work by Jörg Guido Hülsmann (“Free Banking and the Free Bankers,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 9, no. 1 [1996]: 3–53).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="2">
    <p>
      As a doctrinal matter, Selgin and White also suggest that their view of fractional reserve banking coincides with Ludwig von Mises’s view; hence, they call themselves Misesians and claim it is the defenders of 100-percent-reserve banking who are deviationists. This claim can be rejected. In fact, Selgin (<em>The Theory of Free Banking: Money Supply under Competitive Note Issue</em> [Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988], pp. 60–63) has frankly acknowledged that Mises’s and his own views concerning fiduciary media are contradictory and White’s attempt to claim Mises as a proponent of fractional reserve free banking has been addressed by Salerno (“Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 6, no. 2 [1993]: 113–46). Here it suffices to provide a quotation from Mises:
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        The main thing is that the government should no longer be in a position to increase the quantity of money in circulation and the amount of cheque-book money not fully—i.e., 100 percent—covered by deposits paid in by the public…. No bank must be permitted to expand the total amount of its deposits subject to cheque or the balance of such deposits of any individual customer … otherwise than by receiving cash deposits … or by receiving a cheque payable by another domestic bank subject to the same limitations. This means a rigid 100 per cent reserve for all future deposits; i.e., all deposits not already in existence on the first day of the reform. (<em>The Theory of Money and Credit</em> [Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1978], pp. 438 and 48)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <p>
      See also notes 11, 25, 37, 47, and 48 below.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="3">
    <p>
      Lawrence H. White, <em>Competition and Currency</em> (New York: New York University Press, 1989).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="4">
    <p>
      See Salerno, “Ludwig von Mises’s Monetary Theory in Light of Modern Monetary Thought,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 8, no. 1 (1994): 71–115\. Selgin and White highlight the fact that Hoppe referred to them as proponents of “partial fiat money,” but then are ultimately compelled to admit that he did in fact not misrepresent their position as advocates of fractional reserve banking based on an underlying gold standard. Their complaint amounts to no more than a dispute over semantics. We will treat it as such here, too, and will concentrate instead exclusively on substantive disagreements.
    </p>
    
    <p>
      There is actually more to the charge of Selgin and White being fiat money advocates in the article under scrutiny. For, in “the mature free-banking system,” according to Selgin and White (but in contrast to the analysis of the operation of such a system given by Mises), a situation is supposed to emerge in which
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        At the limit, if inter-clearinghouse settlements were made entirely with other assets (perhaps claims on a super-clearinghouse which itself holds negligible commodity money), and if the public were completely weaned from holding commodity money, the active demand for the old-fashioned money commodity would be wholly nonmonetary. (Lawrence White, <em>Competition and Currency</em> [New York: New York University Press, 1989], p. 235)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <p>
      Thus, notes Salerno (“Ludwig von Mises’s Monetary Theory in Light of Modern Monetary Thought,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 8, no. 1 [1994]: 71–115, p. 76, n. 7) regarding Selgin and White’s ultimate objective, “the public would presumably finally be freed from its shackles of gold to enjoy the virtues of an invisible-hand-generated private fiat money.” Moreover, as far as semantic innovations and deviations from orthodox Misesian terminology, and hence potential sources of confusion are concerned, we have to consider Selgin and White’s own writings. For in referring to money and money substitutes as “outside and “inside” money respectively, in talking of “base money,” “basic money,” “bank money,” “high-powered” and “low-powered” money, and, yes, the gold dollar “as a substitute for bank deposits,” they display an unusual degree of semantic creativity. Moreover, in suggesting, by their selection of terms, that all of these things are somehow equally “money,” their writings actually have become a source of obfuscation. See on this Hülsmann, “Free Banking and the Free Bankers,” pp. 5ff.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="5">
    <p>
      Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 86–87.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="6">
    <p>
      Ibid., p. 87, n. 8.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="7">
    <p>
      It is also “impossible that some time depositor and borrower are entitled to exclusive control over the same resources” (Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?”, p. 67).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="8">
    <p>
      Even partners cannot simultaneously own the <em>same</em> thing. A and B can each own half of a household, or half the shares in it but they each own a <em>different</em> 50 percent. It is as logically impossible for them to own the same half as for two people to occupy the same space. Yes, A and B can both be in New York City at the same time, but only in different parts of it.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="9">
    <p>
      Jesús Huerta de Soto (“A Critical Analysis of Central Banks,” p. 33) correctly likens the effect of fractional reserve banking to that of the so-called tragedy of the commons. Selgin and White (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 92–93, n. 12) object to de Soto’s analogy on the ground that the tragedy of the commons refers “to a particular sort of technological externality,” according to Selgin and White, involves “a physical or otherwise direct interference with someone’s consumption or production” and represents “interaction outside the market.” In contrast, write Selgin and White, the “externality from fiduciary media” is a harmless pecuniary “effect on someone’s wealth transmitted via the price system,” that is, through changes in the system of relative prices, and represents “an interdependence through the market.” Selgin and White err: an object and a title to an object are not the same thing.
    </p>
    
    <p>
      In lumping money and money substitutes together under the joint title of “money,” as if they were somehow the same thing, Selgin and White fail to grasp that the issue of fiduciary media—an increase of property titles—is not the same thing as a larger supply of property and that relative price changes effected through the issue of fiduciary media are an entirely different “externality” matter than price changes effected through an increase in the supply of property. With this the fundamental distinction between property and a property title in mind, de Soto’s analogy between fractional reserve banking and the tragedy of the commons makes perfect sense. As under the scenario of a tragedy of the commons, every issue of fiduciary media—to titles in search of property—sets in motion a rush, always starting with the bank and its client, to fill these empty tickets with existing property; and in the course of this rush, invariably the first-comers will physically enrich themselves (through the appropriation of existing quantities of property) at the expense of a corresponding impoverishment of later-comers, whose quantity of existing property is physically diminished while they have been left with a larger number of property tickets.
    </p>
  </fn>
</footnotes>