## Análise de Classe Marxista e Austríaca

Eu vou fazer o seguinte neste capítulo: Primeiro, apresentarei uma série de teses que constituem o âmago da teoria histórica Marxista. Eu afirmarei que todas são essencialmente corretas. Então mostrarei como essas teses verdadeiras são derivadas no Marxismo de uma premissa falsa. Finalmente, quero demonstrar como Austrianismo na tradição "Mises-Rothbardiania" pode dar uma correta mas categoricamente diferente explanação de sua validade.

Deixe-me começar com o âmago do sistema de crença Marxista:[^1]

1. "A história da humanidade é a história da luta de classes."[^2] É a história de lutas entre uma relativamente pequena classe dominante e uma maior classe dos dominados. A forma primária de exploração é econômica: A classe dominante desapropria parte da produção dos explorados ou, como os Marxistas dizem, "se apropria de um excedente produtivo social e utiliza-o para seus próprios fins de consumo."
2. A classe dominante é unificada pelo seu interesse comum em defender sua posição exploradora e maximizar seu excedente produtivo apropriado pela exploração. A classe dominante nunca deliberadamente entregará poder ou rendimento oriundo da exploração. Instead, any loss in power or income must be wrestled away from it through struggles, whose outcome ultimately depends on the class consciousness of the exploited, i.e., on whether or not and to what extent the exploited are aware of their own status and are consciously united with other class members in common opposition to exploitation.
3. Class rule manifests itself primarily in specific arrangements regarding the assignment of property rights or, in Marxist terminology, in specific “relations of production.” In order to protect these arrangements or production relations, the ruling class forms and is in command of the state as the apparatus of compulsion and coercion. The state enforces and helps reproduce a given class structure through the administration of a system of “class justice,” and it assists in the creation and the support of an ideological superstructure designed to lend legitimacy to the existence of class rule.
4. Internally, the process of competition within the ruling class generates a tendency toward increasing concentration and centralization. A multipolar system of exploitation is gradually supplanted by an oligarchic or monopolistic one. Fewer and fewer exploitation centers remain in operation, and those that do are increasingly integrated into a hierarchical order. Externally (i.e., as regards the international system), this centralization process will (and all the more intensively the more advanced it is) lead to imperialist interstate wars and the territorial expansion of exploitative rule.
5. Finally, with the centralization and expansion of exploitative rule gradually approaching its ultimate limit of world domination, class rule will increasingly become incompatible with the further development and improvement of “productive forces.” Economic stagnation and crises become more and more characteristic and create the “objective conditions” for the emergence of a revolutionary class consciousness of the exploited. The situation becomes ripe for the establishment of a classless society, the “withering away of the state,” the replacement of government of men over men by the administration of things[^3] and, as its result, unheard-of economic prosperity.

A todas essas teses podem ser dadas perfeitamente boas justificativas, como mostrarei. Unfortunately, however, it is Marxism, which subscribes to all of them, that has done more than any other ideological system to discredit their validity in deriving them from a patently absurd exploitation theory.

O que é esta teoria marxista da exploração? De acordo com Marx, tais sistemas sociais pré-capitalistas como escravidão e feudalismo são caracterizadas pela exploração. Não há discussão com isso. Pois afinal de contas, o escravo não é um trabalhador livre, e ele não pode ser dito beneficiado por ser escravizado. Em vez disso, em sendo escravizado sua utilidade é reduzida à custa de um aumento na riqueza apropriada pelo mestre do escravo. O interesse do escravo e o interesse do dono do escravo são de fato antagônicos. O mesmo é verdadeiro no que respeita os interesses do lorde feudal que extrai um aluguel da terra de um camponês que trabalha na terra apropriada e cultivada por ele mesmo (isto é, o camponês). Os ganhos do senhor são as perdas do camponês. Também é indiscutível que a escravidão, bem como o feudalismo na verdade dificultam o desenvolvimento das forças produtivas. Nem escravo, nem servo serão tão produtivos quanto eles seriam sem escravidão ou servidão.

The genuinely new Marxist idea is that essentially nothing is changed as regards exploitation under capitalism (if the slave becomes a free laborer), or if the peasant decides to farm land homesteaded by someone else and pays rent in exchange for doing so. To be sure, Marx, in the famous chapter 24 of the first volume of his *Kapital*, titled “The So-called Original Accumulation,” gives a historical account of the emergence of capitalism which makes the point that much or even most of the initial capitalist property is the result of plunder, enclosure, and conquest. Similarmente, no capítulo 25, sobre a "Teoria do Colonialismo Moderno," o papel da força e da violência na exportação do capitalismo para o, como diríamos hoje em dia, o terceiro mundo é fortemente enfatizado. Evidentemente, tudo isso é em geral correto, e na medida em que é, não pode haver nenhuma desavença com a rotulagem de tal capitalismo explorador. No entanto, deve estar ciente do fato de que aqui Marx está envolvido em um truque. In engaging in historical investigations and arousing the reader’s indignation regarding the brutalities underlying the formation of many capitalist fortunes, he actually side-steps the issue at hand. He distracts from the fact that his thesis is really an entirely different one: namely, that even if one were to have “clean” capitalism so to speak (one in which the original appropriation of capital were the result of nothing else but homesteading), work and savings, the capitalist who hired labor to be employed with this capital would nonetheless be engaged in exploitation. De fato, Marx considerou a prova desta tese sua contribuição mais importante para a análise econômica.

Qual, então, é a prova do caráter explorador de um capitalismo limpo?

Consiste na observação de que os preços de produção, em particular os salários pagos a trabalhadores pelo capitalista, são inferiores aos preços de venda. O trabalhador, por exemplo, é pago um salário que representa os bens de consumo que podem ser produzidos em três dias, mas ele na verdade trabalha cinco dias por seu salário e produz bens de consumo que excede o que ele recebe como remuneração. A produção dos dois dias extras, a mais-valia na terminologia Marxista, é apropriada pelo capitalista. Assim, segundo Marx, há exploração. [^4]

O que há de errado com esta análise? [^5] A resposta torna-se evidente, uma vez que é perguntado por que o trabalhador iria possivelmente concordar com tal negócio! Ele concorda, porque seu pagamento salarial representa bens presentes — enquanto seus próprios serviços de mão de obra representam apenas bens futuros — e ele valoriza mais os bens presentes. Afinal de contas, ele poderia também decidir não vender sua mão de obra ao capitalista e então mapear o valor inteiro de sua produção por si mesmo. Mas isso implicaria obviamente que ele teria que esperar mais tempo para que quaisquer bens de consumo se tornassem disponíveis para ele. Vendendo seus serviços de mão de obra, ele demonstra que ele prefere uma quantidade menor de bens de consumo agora a uma quantidade possivelmente maior no futuro. Por outro lado, por que iria o capitalista querer chegar a um acordo com o trabalhador? Por que quereria ele adiantar bens presentes (dinheiro) para o trabalhador em troca de serviços que dão frutos só mais tarde? Obviamente, ele não iria querer pagar $100 agora se ele fosse receber a mesma quantidade em um ano. Nesse caso, por que não simplesmente guardá-lo por um ano e receber o benefício extra de ter comando sobre ele durante todo o tempo? Em vez disso, ele espera receber uma quantia maior que $100 no futuro a fim de dar $100 agora sob a forma de salários pagos para o trabalhador. Ele espera ser capaz de ganhar um lucro, ou mais corretamente um retorno de interesse/juros. He is also constrained by time preference, i.e., the fact that an actor invariably prefers earlier over later goods, in yet another way. Pois se alguém poder obter uma quantia maior no futuro sacrificando uma menor no presente, por que então o capitalista não está interessado em economizando mais do que atualmente está? Por que ele não contrata mais trabalhadores, se cada um deles promete um lucro adicional? A resposta novamente deveria ser óbvia: porque o capitalista também é um consumidor e não pode deixar de ser um. A quantidade de suas economias e investimentos é restrita pela necessidade que ele, também, como o trabalhador, exige um suprimento de bens presentes "grandes o suficiente para garantir a satisfação de todas aquelas necessidade a satisfação a qual durante o tempo de espera é considerada mais urgente do que as vantagens que um alongamento ainda maior do período de produção proporcionaria." [^6]

O que há de errado com a teoria de Marx de exploração, então, é que ele não entende o fenômeno da preferência de tempo como uma categoria universal da ação humana. [^7] Que o fato do trabalhador não receber seu "valor cheio" não tem nada a ver com a exploração, mas meramente reflete o fato de que é impossível para um homem trocar bens futuros por bens presentes exceto por uma condição. Contrário ao caso do escravo e o mestre do escravo onde o último se beneficia à custa do primeiro, a relação entre o trabalhador livre e o capitalista é mutuamente benéfica. O trabalhador entra no acordo porque, dada sua preferência temporal, ele prefere uma quantidade menor de bens presentes a uma futura quantidade maior; e o capitalista entra no acordo porque, dada sua preferência temporal, ele tem uma ordem de preferência inversa e considera uma quantidade futura maior de bens mais valiosa do que uma menor no presente. Seus interesses não são antagônicos, mas harmoniosos. Without the capitalist’s expectation of an interest return, the laborer would be worse off having to wait longer than he wishes to wait; and without the laborer’s preference for present goods the capitalist would be worse off having to resort to less roundabout and less efficient production methods than those which he desires to adopt. Nor can the capitalist wage system be regarded as an impediment to the further development of the forces of production, as Marx claims. If the laborer were not permitted to sell his labor services and the capitalist to buy them, output would not be higher but lower, because production would have to take place with relatively reduced levels of capital accumulation.

Under a system of socialized production, quite contrary to Marx’s proclamations, the development of productive forces would not reach new heights but would instead sink dramatically.[^8] For obviously, capital accumulation must be brought about by definite individuals at definite points in time and space through homesteading, producing and/or saving. In each case it is brought about with the expectation that it will lead to an increase in the output of future goods. The value an actor attaches to his capital reflects the value he attaches to all expected future incomes attributable to its cooperation and discounted by his rate of time preference. If, as in the case of collectively owned factors of production, an actor is no longer granted exclusive control over his accumulated capital and hence over the future income to be derived from its employment, but partial control instead is assigned to nonhomesteaders, nonproducers, and nonsavers, the value for him of the expected income and hence that of the capital goods is reduced. His effective rate of time preference will rise and there will be less homesteading of scarce resources, and less saving for the maintenance of existing resources and the production of new capital goods. The period of production, the roundaboutness of the production structure, will be shortened, and relative impoverishment will result.

If Marx’s theory of capitalist exploitation and his ideas on how to end exploitation and establish universal prosperity are false to the point of being ridiculous, it is clear that any theory of history which can be derived from it must be false, too. Or if it should be correct, it must have been derived incorrectly. Instead of going through the lengthier task of explaining all of the flaws in the Marxist argument as it sets out from its theory of capitalist exploitation and ends with the theory of history which I presented earlier, I will take a shortcut here. I will now outline in the briefest possible way the correct—Austrian, Misesian-Rothbardian—theory of exploitation; give an explanatory sketch of how this theory makes sense out of the class theory of history; and highlight along the way some key differences between this class theory and the Marxist one and also point out some intellectual affinities between Austrianism and Marxism stemming from their common conviction that there does indeed exist something like exploitation and a ruling class.[^9]

The starting point for the Austrian exploitation theory is plain and simple, as it should be. Actually, it has already been established through the analysis of the Marxist theory: Exploitation characterized the relationship between slave and slave master and serf and feudal lord. But no exploitation was found possible under a clean capitalism. What is the principle difference between these two cases? The answer is: the recognition or nonrecognition of the homesteading principle. The peasant under feudalism is exploited because he does not have exclusive control over land that he homesteaded, and the slave because he has no exclusive control over his own homesteaded body. If, contrary to this, everyone has exclusive control over his own body (is a free laborer, that is) and acts in accordance with the homesteading principle, there can be no exploitation. It is logically absurd to claim that a person who homesteads goods not previously homesteaded by anybody else, or who employs such goods in the production of future goods, or who saves presently homesteaded or produced goods in order to increase the future supply of goods, could thereby exploit anybody. Nothing has been taken away from anybody in this process and additional goods have actually been created. And it would be equally absurd to claim that an agreement between different homesteaders, savers and producers regarding their nonexploitatively appropriated goods or services could possibly contain any foul play, then. Instead, exploitation takes place whenever any *deviation* from the homesteading principle occurs. It is exploitation whenever a person successfully claims partial or full control over scarce resources which he has not homesteaded, saved or produced, and which he has not acquired contractually from a previous producer-owner. Exploitation is the expropriation of homesteaders, producers and savers by late-coming nonhomesteaders, nonproducers, nonsavers and noncontractors; it is the expropriation of people whose property claims are grounded in work and contract by people whose claims are derived from thin air and who disregard others’ work and contracts.[^10]

Needless to say, exploitation thus defined is in fact an integral part of human history. One can acquire and increase wealth either through homesteading, producing, saving, or contracting, or by expropriating homesteaders, producers, savers or contractors. There are no other ways. Both methods are natural to mankind. Alongside homesteading, producing and contracting, there have always been nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. And in the course of economic development, just as producers and contractors can form firms, enterprises and corporations, so can exploiters combine to large-scale exploitation enterprises, governments and states. The ruling class (which may again be internally stratified) is initially composed of the members of such an exploitation firm. And with a ruling class established over a given territory and engaged in the expropriation of economic resources from a class of exploited producers, the center of all history indeed becomes the struggle between exploiters and the exploited. History, then, correctly told, is essentially the history of the victories and defeats of the rulers in their attempt to maximize exploitatively appropriated income and of the ruled in their attempts to resist and reverse this tendency. It is in this assessment of history that Austrians and Marxists agree, and it is why a notable intellectual affinity between Austrian and Marxist historical investigations exists. Both oppose a historiography which recognizes only action or interaction, economically and morally all on a par; and both oppose a historiography that instead of adopting such a valueneutral stand thinks that one’s own arbitrarily introduced subjective value judgments have to provide the foil for one’s historical narratives. Rather, history must be told in terms of freedom and exploitation, parasitism and economic impoverishment, private property and its destruction—otherwise it is told false.[^11]

While productive enterprises come into or go out of existence because of voluntary support or its absence, a ruling class never comes to power because there is a demand for it, nor does it abdicate when abdication is demonstrably demanded. One cannot say by any stretch of the imagination that homesteaders, producers, savers and contractors have demanded their expropriation. They must be coerced into accepting it, and this proves conclusively that the exploitation firm is not in demand at all. Nor can one say that a ruling class can be brought down by abstaining from transactions with it in the same way as one can bring down a productive enterprise. For the ruling class acquires its income through nonproductive and noncontractual transactions and thus is unaffected by boycotts. Rather, what makes the rise of an exploitation firm possible, and what alone can in turn bring it down is a specific state of public opinion or, in Marxist terminology, a specific state of class consciousness.

An exploiter creates victims, and victims are potential enemies. It is possible that this resistance can be lastingly broken down by force in the case of a group of men exploiting another group of roughly the same size. However, more than force is needed to expand exploitation over a population many times its own size. For this to happen, a firm must also have public support. A majority of the population must accept the exploitative actions as legitimate. This acceptance can range from active enthusiasm to passive resignation. But it must be acceptance in the sense that a majority must have given up the idea of actively or passively resisting any attempt to enforce nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. The class consciousness must be low, undeveloped and fuzzy. Only as long as this state of affairs lasts is there still room for an exploitative firm to prosper even if no actual demand for it exists. Only if and insofar as the exploited and expropriated develop a clear idea of their own situation and are united with other members of their class through an ideological movement which gives expression to the idea of a classless society where all exploitation is abolished, can the power of the ruling class be broken. Only if, and insofar as, a majority of the exploited public becomes consciously integrated into such a movement and accordingly displays a common outrage over all nonproductive or noncontractual property acquisitions, shows a contempt for everyone who engages in such acts, and deliberately contributes nothing to help make them successful (not to mention actively trying to obstruct them), can its power be brought to crumble.

[^1]: See on the following Karl Marx and Frederic Engels, *The Communist Manifesto* (1848); Karl Marx, *Das Kapital*, 3 vols. (1867; 1885; 1894); as contemporary Marxists, Ernest Mandel, *Marx’s Economic Theory* (London: Merlin, 1962); idem, *Late Capitalism* (London: New Left Books, 1975); Paul Baran and Paul Sweezy, *Monopoly Capital* (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1966); from a non-Marxist perspective, Leszek Kolakowski, *Main Currents of Marxism* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995); G. Wetter, *Sovietideologie heute* (Frankfurt/M.: Fischer, 1962), vol. 1; W. Leonhard, *Sovietideologie heute* (Frankfurt/M.: Fischer, 1962), vol. 2.

[^2]: Marx and Engels, *The Communist Manifesto* (section 1).

[^3]: *The Communist Manifesto* (section 2, last 2 paragraphs); Frederic Engels, *Von tier Autorität*, in Karl Marx and Frederic Engels, *Ausgewählte Schriften*, 2 vols. (East Berlin: Dietz, 1953), vol. I, p. 606; idem, *Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft*, ibid., vol. 2, p. 139.

[^4]: See Marx, *Das Kapital*, vol. I; the shortest presentation is his *Lohn, Preis, Profit* (1865). Actually, in order to prove the more specific Marxist thesis that exclusively the owner of labor services is exploited (but not the owner of the other originary factor of production: land), yet another argument would be needed. For if it were true that the discrepancy between factor and output prices constitutes an exploitative relation, this would only show that the capitalist who rents labor services from an owner of labor, and land services from an owner of land would exploit either labor, or land, or labor and land simultaneously. It is the labor theory of value, of course, which is supposed to provide the missing link here by trying to establish labor as the sole source of value. I will spare myself the task of refuting this theory. Few enough remain today, even among those claiming to be Marxists, who do not recognize the faultiness of the labor theory of value. Rather, I will accept for the sake of argument the suggestion made, for instance, by the self-proclaimed “analytical Marxist” John Roemer (*A General Theory of Exploitation and Class* [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982]; idem, *Value, Exploitation and Class* [London: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1985]) that the theory of exploitation can be separated analytically from the labor theory of value; and that a “generalized commodity exploitation theory” can be formulated which can be justified regardless of whether or not the labor theory of value is true. I want to demonstrate that the Marxist theory of exploitation is nonsensical even if one were to absolve its proponents from having to prove the labor theory of value and, indeed, even if the labor theory of value were true. Even a generalized commodity exploitation theory provides no escape from the conclusion that the Marxist theory of exploitation is dead wrong.

[^5]: See on the following Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, *The Exploitation Theory of Socialism-Communism* (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1975); idem, *Shorter Classics of Böhm-Bawerk* (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1962).

[^6]: Ludwig von Mises, *Human Action* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966), p. 407; see also Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), pp. 300–01.

[^7]: See on the time preference theory of interest in addition to the works cited in notes 5 and 6; also Frank Fetter, *Capital, Interest and Rent* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977).

[^8]: See on the following Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989); idem, “Why Socialism Must Fail,” *Free Market* (July 1988); idem, “The Economics and Sociology of Taxation,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* (1990); supra chap. 2.

[^9]: Mises’s contributions to the theory of exploitation and class are unsystematic. However, throughout his writings he presents sociological and historical interpretations that are class analyses, if only implicitly. Noteworthy here is in particular his acute analysis of the collaboration between government and banking elite in destroying the gold standard in order to increase their inflationary powers as a means of fraudulent, exploitative income and wealth redistribution in their own favor. See for instance his *Monetary Stabilization and Cyclical Policy* (1928) in idem, *On the Manipulation of Money and Credit,* ed. Percy Greaves (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Free Market Books 1978); idem, *Socialism* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1981), chap. 20; idem, *The Clash of Group Interests and Other Essays* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 7, 1978). Yet Mises does not give systematic status to class analysis and exploitation theory because he ultimately misconceives of exploitation as merely an intellectual error which correct economic reasoning can dispel. He fails to fully recognize that exploitation is also and probably even more so a moral-motivational problem that exists regardless of all economic reasoning. Rothbard adds his insight to the Misesian structure of Austrian economics and makes the analysis of power and power elites an integral part of economic theory and historical-sociological explanations; and he systematically expands the Austrian case against exploitation to include ethics in addition to economic theory, i.e., a theory of justice next to a theory of efficiency, such that the ruling class can also be attacked as immoral. For Rothbard’s theory of power, class and exploitation, see in particular his *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977); idem, *For a New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983); idem, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975). On important nineteenth-century forerunners of Austrian class analysis, see Leonard Liggio, “Charles Dunoyer and French Classical Liberalism,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 3 (1977); Ralph Raico, “Classical Liberal Exploitation Theory,” *Journal of L ibertarian Studies* 1, no. 3 (1977); Mark Weinburg, “The Social Analysis of Three Early 19th Century French Liberals: Say, Comte, and Dunoyer,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 2, no. 1 (1978); Joseph T. Salerno, “Comment on the French Liberal School,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 2, no. 1 (1978); David M. Hart, “Gustave de Molinari and the Anti-Statist Liberal Tradition,” 2 parts, *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 5, nos. 3 and 4 (1981).

[^10]: See on this also Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*; idem, “The Justice of Economic Efficiency,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* 1 (1988); infra chap. 9; idem, “The Ultimate Justification of the Private Property Ethics,” *Liberty* (September 1988): infra chap. 10.

[^11]: See on this theme also Lord (John) Acton, *Essays in the History of Liberty* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1985); Franz Oppenheimer, *System der Soziologie*, vol. II: *Der Staat* (Stuttgart: G. Fischer, 1964); Alexander Rüstow, *Freedom and Domination* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1986).