Não é difícil ilustrar a validade dessas conclusões se considerarmos o caso tudo-muito-familiar da taxação de ativos monetários. Esse ativos são adquiridos e mantidos somente poque eles podem comprar outros ativos valiosos em datas futuras. Ele absolutamente não possuem uso-valor intrínseco próprio (como no caso de uma moeda fiduciária), ou então uso-valor é insignificante comparado com a troca-valor (como no caso do ouro padrão onde o dinheiro também tem um - mesmo que pequeno - valor de commodity). Em vez disso, o valor atrelado a eles é por causa do futuro poder de compra deles. Ainda, se o valor do dinheiro consistir de representar outro ativo disponível no futuro, o efeito da taxação do dinheiro se torna clara imediatamente. Mais importante, junto com o aumento da utilidade marginal do lazer ou consumo, tais impostos aumentam a utilidade margina desse ativo futuro. Essa mudando na constelação de incentivos se traduz por um ator aumentando o número de esforços para obter esses ativos mais rapidamente, in menos processos de produção que consomem muito tempo. O único processo de produção agora que são sistematicamente menores que aquele de ganhar ativos futuros indiretamente, através da aquisição de dinheiro precoce, são aqueles de adquiri-los através de trocas diretas. Portanto, taxação implica que permutas serão substituídas gradualmente por métodos de produção de trocas monetárias mais longas. Porém, mais uma vez, recorrer cada vez mais à permuta é uma regressão para o primitivismo e barbarismo econômico. Isso foi exatamente porque a produção para propósitos de permuta gerou um resultado extremamente baixo que a humanidade de fato superou esse estágio de desenvolvimento e, em vez disso, continuamente recorreu a ele e expandiu para um sistema de produção para trocas indiretas com o propósito de, enquanto requer um maior tempo de espera, gera um retorno muito maior que já se teve de diferentes e mais ativos puxados para o nexo monetário. Cada ato de tributação significa um retrocesso coagido nesse processo. Ele reduz a produção, diminui a extensão da divisão do trabalho, e leva à redução da integração social e econômica (que, isso pode ser notado, poderia nunca ter se tornado mundial, se não fosse pela instituição de trocas monetárias indiretas).

Além disso, a tendência geral segue consecutivamente adotando mecanismos de trocas diretas, em vez de indiretas, causada por cada captura coerciva de dinheiro, também tem consequência muito importantes em relação aos métodos de obtenção de dinheiro. Apenas como no caso de ativos monetários, o aumento da utilidade marginal do dinheiro junto com o do lazer-consumo também faz isso relativamente mais atraente para aquisição de dinheiro de modos menos consumidores de tempo. Em vez de adquiri-lo pelo retorno de esforços produtores de valores, isto é, dentro de um quadro de trocas mutualmente beneficiárias, a tributação aumenta o incentivo de adquirir isso mais rapidamente e diretamente, sem ter que ir através de métodos tediosos como produção e contratação. Por um lado, isso significa que alguém vai tentar mais frequentemente aumentar seus ativos monetários através de simplesmente escondê-los do coletor de impostos. Por outro lado, uma tendência crescente vai emergir para entrar na posse de dinheiro através da captura coerciva - tanto da forma ilegal que é chamada de roubo, ou legalmente, através da participação de um jogo chamado política.[^9]

Tendo completado essa análise econômica geral dos efeitos da tributação, que os autores de livros econômicos hoje em dia preferem não lidar com ela de maneira alguma, deixe-me direcionar sobre o que eles tipicamente dizem sobre os efeitos da tributação sob o título de incidência tributária. À luz de nossa análise prévia, será fácil detectar a falha fatal nessa conta. De fato, a pessoa deveria cair impetuosamente em erro ao lidar com os específicos se ela não se importou em estudar os básicos, pode arduamente aparecer como uma completa surpresa.

A conta padrão do problema da incidência de impostos mais frequentemente exemplificada pelo caso de um imposto sobre consumo ou sobre vendas é assim: [^10] Suponha que um imposto sobre consumo ou sobre vendas seja obrigatório. Quem deve arcar com o fardo disso? It is recognized—and I have of course no intention of disputing the validity of this—that in one sense there can be no question that consumers must take the brunt, and invariably do. For no matter what the specific consequences of such a tax are, it must either be the case that consumers will have to pay a higher price for the same goods and their standard of living will be impaired because of this, or it must be the case that the tax imposes higher costs on producers, and consumers will then be punished because of a lower output produced. However, and it is with this that we will have to disagree sharply, it is then argued that whether or not the imposition of a tax harms consumers in the former or in the latter way is an open empirical question, the answer to which depends on the elasticity of demand for the taxed products. If the demand is sufficiently inelastic, then producers will shift the entire burden onto consumers in the form of higher prices. If it is highly elastic, then producers will have to absorb the tax in the form of higher costs of production, and if some section of the demand curve is inelastic and another elastic (this allegedly being empirically the most frequent case), then the burden somehow will have to be shared, with part of it being shifted onto consumers and another falling on producers.

What is wrong with this sort of argument? While it is couched in terms different from those used in my earlier analysis, one can hardly fail to notice that it merely restates, on a somewhat more specific level of discussion, what has already been demonstrated as false on a more general level: the thesis that taxes may or may not reduce productive output; that there is no necessary connection between taxes and productive output; and that it must be considered empirically possible that a tax may affect consumption exclusively while production remains untouched. To assume, as the textbook-account of taxincidence does, that taxes can be shifted forward, either totally or partially, onto consumers is simply to say that a tax may not negatively affect production. For if it were possible to shift any amount of a tax forward onto consumers, that amount would represent a “nonproduction tax,” a tax exclusively on consumption.[^11]

In order to refute the typical textbook analysis, one could simply go back to our previous discussion that resulted in the conclusion that any tax imposed on people constrained by time preference must negatively affect production above and beyond any negative consequences that it implies for consumption. However, I will choose a somewhat different route of argument here in order to make essentially the same point and thereby establish the more specific thesis that no amount of any tax can be shifted onto consumers. To assume otherwise is to assume something manifestly impossible.

The absurdity of the tax-forward-shifting doctrine becomes clear as soon as one tries to apply it to the case of a single actor who continuously acts in both roles—that of a producer and a consumer. For such a producer-consumer, the doctrine amounts to this proposition: If he is faced with an increase in the costs of attaining some future good—an increase, that is, that he himself perceives as a cost-increasing event—then he shifts these higher costs onto himself in such a way that he responds by attaching a correspondingly higher value to the good to be obtained, thereby restoring his old profit-margin, thus leaving his role as producer unchanged and unimpaired, and requiring restrictive adjustments exclusively in his role as a consumer. Or, formulated even more drastically, insofar as his value-productive efforts are concerned, a tax does not make any difference for an individual, because he just starts liking the to-be-produced good correspondingly more.

Plain reasoning reveals that what generates such absurdity is a fundamental conceptual confusion: The forward-shifting doctrine arises from not recognizing that in one’s analysis one must assume that demand is given—and that this must be assumed because it in fact is given at any point in time. Any analysis that loses track of this is flawed, for if one were to assume that demand had changed, then everything would be possible: production might increase, decrease, or remain unchanged. If I am a producer of tea and tea is taxed and if it is assumed that the demand schedule for tea rises concurrently, then, naturally, it is possible that people are now willing to pay a higher price for tea than previously. Yet this is obviously not a forward shifting of the tax but the result of a change in demand. To present this possibility under the heading of tax-incidence analysis is plain nonsense: it is in fact an analysis of the entirely different question of how prices are affected by changes in demand and has nothing whatsoever to do with the effects of taxation. The confusion here is on as grand a scale as that which one would encounter if someone were to “refute” the statement that one apple and another make two by saying “No, I have just added another apple, and look, there are not two but three apples here.” It is hard to get away with such nonsense in math; in economics a doctrine hardly less absurd is the orthodoxy.

Yet if one is logically committed to assuming demand to be given whenever one tries to answer the question whether or not a tax can be shifted forward, every tax must be interpreted as an event that exclusively affects the supply side: it reduces the supplies at the disposal of suppliers.[^12] Any other conclusion would amount to a denial of what had been assumed from the outset—that a tax had indeed been imposed and perceived as such by producers. To say that only the supply curve is shifted whenever a tax is extracted (while the demand curve remains the same as before) is to say nothing else than that the entire tax-burden must in fact be absorbed by the suppliers. To be sure, the leftward shift of the supply curve would cause prices to rise and consumers would naturally be harmed by having to pay these higher prices and by only being able to afford a smaller amount of goods at such a price.[^13] Yet that consumers will invariably be hurt by taxes has of course never been doubted as one should recall. However, it is a misconception to think that this higher price is a shifting of the tax burden from producers to consumers. Rather, consumers are hurt here “only” by harm being done to producers who, despite higher prices charged for their supplies, must bear the brunt.[^14] One must ask oneself why, if an entrepreneur could indeed shift any amount of the tax-burden away from himself and onto consumers, he would not have already done so by voluntarily imposing a tax on himself instead of waiting for the actual coercive tax to come along! The answer is clear: At all times he is constrained in his price-setting activity by the actual given demand. The price set by any entrepreneur is set with the expectation that a price higher than the one actually chosen would yield a lower total revenue. Otherwise, if he expected a higher price to bring about a larger revenue he would raise it. As long as an entrepreneur expects the demand to be inelastic within the region of any price-range under consideration, he will take advantage of this and choose the higher price. He stops raising prices and settles for a specific one because his expectations are reversed and he anticipates the demand curve above this price to be elastic. These expectations regarding inelastic and elastic portions of the demand curve are not at all changed if the entrepreneur is faced with a tax. Then as now he expects higher prices to produce revenue losses. Thus, it is obviously out of the question to argue that he could escape the burden of the tax. In fact, if as a consequence of the reduced supply the price now rises, this upward movement must be into an elastic portion of the demand curve, and the entrepreneur thus must assumedly pay the full price of it in the form of reduced revenue. Any other conclusion is logically flawed. Only if the entrepreneur expects a change in demand occurring simultaneously with taxation could he change his price without thereby incurring losses. If he expects demand to have increased, for instance, such that there will now be an inelastic rather than an elastic stretch of the demand curve above the presently going price, he will be able to raise it without punishment. Again, this is not a forward shifting of the tax. This is increased demand. With or without the tax the entrepreneur would have acted in precisely the same way. The tax has nothing to do with such price changes. In any case, the tax must be paid exclusively and in full by the suppliers of the taxed goods.[^15]

[^9]: Here once again what has already been explained in a somewhat different connection in note 7 above becomes evident: why it is a fundamental mistake to think that taxation might have a “neutral” effect on production such that any “negative” effects on tax*payers* may be compensated by corresponding “positive” effects on tax *spenders*. What is overlooked in this sort of reasoning is that the introduction of taxation not only implies favoring nonproducers at the expense of producers. It simultaneously changes, for producers and nonproducers alike, the cost attached to different methods of attaining an income, for it is then relatively less costly to attain an additional income through nonproductive means, i.e., not through actually producing more goods but by participating in the process of noncontractual acquisitions of already produced goods. If such a different incentive structure is applied to a given population, then the length of the production structure will necessarily be shortened, and a decrease in the output of goods produced must result. See on this also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989), chap. 4.

[^10]: See for instance William Baumol and Alan Blinder, *Economics: Principles and Policy* (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979), pp. 636ff.; Daniel R. Fusfeld, *Economics: Principles of Political Economy,* 3rd ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1987), pp. 639ff.; Robert Ekelund and Robert Tollison, *Microeconomics*, 2nd ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1988), pp. 463ff. and 469f.; Stanley Fisher, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Richard Schmalensee, *Microeconomics*, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1988), pp. 385f.

[^11]: On the impossibility of a pure consumption tax see also Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 108ff.

[^12]: Baumol and Blinder, *Economics: Principles and Policy*, p. 636, present the *demand* curve as changing in response to a tax.

[^13]: To avoid any misunderstanding then: Insofar as the textbook analyses of tax-incidence point out this fact they are of course entirely correct. It is the interpretation of this phenomenon they give which is fundamentally confused!

[^14]: See on this point also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, p. 809.

[^15]: Should a tax not immediately affect supply at all, as can happen in the short run, then it follows from the above analysis that the price charged will not change at all. For to raise it in response to the tax would once again imply pushing it into an elastic region of the demand curve. In the long run the supply will have to be relatively reduced and prices must move into this region. In any case, no forward shifting takes place. See on this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 807ff.; idem, *Power and Market*, pp. 88ff.