A raíz de la caída del Imperio Romano, Europa occidental cayó en un sistema altamente anárquico de territorios gobernados por gobiernos feudales a pequeña escala. Facilitado por ésta anarquía internacional, que tendía a reducir el poder interno de cada gobierno individual y a facilitar los movimientos poblacionales, [^27] y nutrido por la ideología de la ley natural y derechos naturales, la cual emergió como una teoría cada vez más poderosa entre los miembros de la élite de la Iglesia Católica, el instinto inconfundible del hombre de que solamente la propiedad privada es compatible con la naturaleza de uno como un ser racional tomó forma.[^28] Se desarrollaron pequeños centros donde el poder gubernamental se ha ido reduciendo hasta un punto ciertamente desconocido hasta ese momento: ciudades como las del norte de Italia, especialmente Venecia, aquellas pertenecientes a la Liga Hanseática, como Lübeck y Hamburgo, y las de Flandes y los países bajos, en particular Amberes y Amsterdam. Allí, las ideas feudales de esclavitud, servidumbre y de una sociedad jerárquicamente estratificada y de clases rígidamente separadas fueron suplantadas por una opinión pública que en cambio apoyaba las ideas de libertad, de igualdad, de los derechos de propiedad y de las relaciones contractuales. Esta opinión pública ganó ininterrumpidamente impulso con la llegada continua de nuevos pobladores, inspirados por ideas similares y atraídos por una prosperidad sin igual que la libertad estaba demostrando ser capaz de producir.[^29]

Sin embargo, las ideas de la razón humana, libertad y propiedad privada aún no estaban suficientemente extendidas. Enraizadas solamente en pocas y dispersas áreas, los más o menos distantes poderes feudales que de una manera natural reconocían estos desarrollos como amenazas a su propia estabilidad podrían una vez más reconstruir su fortaleza. Consolidando sus territorios en Estados a gran escala a través de un largo proceso de luchas y guerras entre feudos logrando de éste modo concentrar y centralizar sus fuerzas, fueron exitosos en su intento de aplastar la idea de libertad que florecía en unos pocos lugares y replantaron su idea de explotación sobre estas áreas con mayor fuerza. La era del absolutismo se había establecido, y con ella la era del superpoder feudal, la monarquía, la cual de manera exitosa centralizó el sistema feudal de explotación sobre territorios que por primera vez alcanzaron el tamaño de los Estados nación modernos y que nos son familiares. Con el absolutismo afianzándose, los territorios competitivos de las ciudades libres se vieron forzados una vez más al declive económico y al estancamiento, los cuales en algunos casos se prolongaron por siglos[^30]

Sin embargo esta victoria no derrotó a las ideas de libertad y propiedad privada. Por el contrario, estas ideas encontraron cada vez más una forma de expresión más poderosa y una opinión pública inspirada. Influenciada por el continuo avance de la tradición de los derechos naturales, otra tradición intelectual secular emergió y cautivó las mentes: la tradición de lo que más tarde se conocería como el liberalismo clásico y que estaba decisivamente aún más centrada alrededor de las nociones de la libertad individual y de la propiedad individual y dedicada a su justificación intelectual.[^31] Además de esto, y estimulado por las recientes experiencias de inigualable prosperidad alcanzada bajo condiciones de libertad y contractualismo, el desarrollo del pensamiento económico dio grandes pasos. Las entonces doctrinas estatistas del mercantilismo ortodoxo, la cameralística y la *Polizeiwissenschaft* quedaron demolidas por un número creciente de de nuevos economistas políticos que sistemáticamente explicaron, con gran minuciosidad y amplitud, el rol indispensable de la propiedad privada y el contractualismo para el proceso de producción y la creación de riqueza y quienes en consecuencia clamaron por una política radical de laisses-faire.[^32]

A partir de 1700, la opinión pública quedó cautivada por estas ideas de tal manera que condiciones revolucionarias surgieron dentro de las monarquías absolutistas en Europa Occidental. Inglaterra había atravesado un número de revoluciones durante el siglo diecisiete que dañaron severamente los poderes del estado absolutista. El siglo dieciocho terminó con los eventos cataclísmicos de las revoluciones Americana y Francesa. Entonces, hacia mediados del siglo diecinueve aproximadamente una serie de desordenes constantes gradualmente llevó la explotación gubernamental hasta un mínimo histórico de toda Europa Occidental.

La idea que había conquistado la opinión pública y que hizo posible está reducción del poder gubernamental fue que la libertad individual y la propiedad privada son solo, evidentemente, naturales, inviolables y sagradas, y que cualquier invasor de estos derechos, sea un agente gubernamental o incluso un infractor privado (ni más ni menos), debe ser considerado, tratado y marginado con desdén.

Con cada paso exitoso hacia la liberación, el movimiento crecía más fuerte. Sumado a esto, la llamada Revolución Industrial que había sido introducida por estos cambios ideológicos y que había provocado tasas de crecimiento económicas inauditas, y por primera vez un sostenido incremento poblacional y un gradual pero continuo crecimiento del estándar de vida general, crearon un casi ilimitado optimismo.[^33] Sin lugar a dudas, en Europa Occidental, incluso durante la primera mitad del siglo diecinueve, quedaba mucho de feudalismo y despotismo absolutista cuando la ideología de libertad y propiedad privada y una vigilancia antiestatista alcanzó su nivel más alto de popularidad, el progreso hacia una erosión más profunda de los poderes de explotación gubernamentales y hacia la libertad y prosperidad económica parecía casi imparable.[^34] Sumado a esto, ahora existe una América independiente, libre de un pasado feudal y con casi ningún gobierno en absoluto, que asumió un rol similar al que asumieron las ciudades libres durante la edad media: sirviendo como una fuente de inspiración ideológica y un centro de atracción pero a mucho mayor escala.[^35]

Hoy en día, queda muy poco de esta ética de la propiedad privada y su vigilancia antigubernamental. Aunque ahora ellas toman su lugar en una escala mucho mayor, las apropiaciones por parte de los gobiernos de las propiedades privadas son consideradas de manera abrumadora como legítimas. Ya no existe una opinión pública general que considere al gobierno como una institución antisocial basada en la coerción y adquisiciones injustas de la propiedad, opuesta y ridiculizada en todas partes y en todo momento por razones de principio. No longer is it generally regarded as morally despicable to propagate or, even worse, to actively participate in the enforcement of acts of expropriation, and no longer is it the general opinion that one would not have any private dealings whatsoever with people who engaged in such activities.

On the contrary, instead of being laughed off the stage or met with open hostility or passive indignation, such people are respected as decent and honest men. The politician who actively supports a continuation of the ongoing system of non-contractual property taxation and regulation or who even demands its expansion is treated everywhere with respect, rather than contempt. The intellectual who justifies taxation and regulation receives recognition as a deep and profound thinker in the public eye, instead of being exposed as an intellectual fraud. The IRS agent is regarded as a man doing a job just as legitimate as yours and mine, and not as an outcast that no one wishes to have as a relative, friend, or neighbor.

How could government accomplish such a feat and bring about a change in public opinion that removed the former constraint on its size and instead allowed (and still allows) it to grow in absolute as well as relative terms?[^36]

There can be no doubt that the key element in this turn-around of public opinion that started to take hold in Western Europe around the mid-nineteenth century, around the turn of this century in the U.S., and then at a steadily accelerating pace everywhere after World War I[^37] has been the emergence of attractive new—implicitly or explicitly—statist ideologies.

In fact, states have always been aware of the decisive importance of state-supportive ideologies for stabilizing and increasing their exploitative grip on a population, and in this knowledge they have always made attempts to exert their control, above all, over the institutions of education. Even at their weakest, it should appear natural to see them give particular attention to “correct” ideological instruction and to concentrate whatever is left of their power on the destruction of all independent institutions of learning and their take-over into the states’ monopolistic hands. Accordingly, in order to regain the upper hand in the permanent struggle of ideas, since the mid-nineteenth century a steady process of nationalizing or socializing schools and universities (with one of the most recent examples being the unsuccessful attempt by the Mitterand government to crush France’s Catholic schools) and lengthening the period of compulsory schooling has taken place.[^38]

Yet pointing out this and the related facts of an increasingly close alliance between state and intellectuals[^39] and the latter’s rewriting history in line with statist ideologies merely puts the problem into focus. Indeed, when one hears about the state’s take-over of the system of education, must one not immediately ask how it could succeed in doing so if public opinion were really committed to a private property ethic?! Such a take-over presupposes a change in public opinion. How, then, was this accomplished, especially in view of the fact that such a change implies the acceptance of manifestly wrong ideas and thus can hardly be explained as an endogenously motivated process of intellectual advancement?

It would seem that such a change toward falsehood requires the systematic introduction of exogenous forces: A true ideology is capable of supporting itself merely by virtue of being true. A false one needs reinforcement by outside influences with a clear-cut, tangible impact on people in order to be capable of generating and supporting a climate of intellectual corruption.

It is to these tangible, ideology-supporting and reinforcing factors that one must turn to understand the decline of the private property ethic and the corresponding rise of statism during the last 100 to 150 years.[^40]

I will discuss four such factors and explain their corruptive function for public opinion. All are changes in the organizational structure of the state. The first one is the state’s structural adjustment from a military or police state toward a redistributive one. (The prototype of such an organizational change is the often copied Prussia under Bismarck.) Instead of a governmental structure that is characterized by a small ruling class that uses its exploitatively appropriated resources almost exclusively for pure governmental consumption or for the maintenance of its military and police forces, states now increasingly engage in a policy of actively buying support among the people outside of the governmental apparatus itself. Through a system of transfer payments, grants of privilege to special clients, and governmental production and provision of certain “civilian” goods and services (as for instance education), the population is made increasingly dependent on the continuation of state rule. People outside the governmental apparatus increasingly have a tangible financial stake in its existence and would be harmed, at least in the short run and in parts of their existence, if the government were to lose power. Quite naturally, this dependency tends to reduce resistance and increase support. Exploitation may still seem reprehensible, but it is less so if one also happens to be someone who at least on some fronts is a legal benefactor of such actions.

[^27]: The importance of international anarchy for the erosion of feudalism and the rise of capitalism has been justly emphasized by Jean Baechler, *The Origins of Capitalism* (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1976), esp. chap. 7\. He writes: “The constant expansion of the market, both in extensiveness and in intensity, was the result of an absence of a political order extending over the whole of Western Europe” (p. 73). “The expansion of capitalism owes its origin and *raison d’etre* to political anarchy…. Collectivism and state management have only succeeded in school textbooks” (p. 77).

> All power tends toward the absolute. If it is not absolute, this is because some kind of limitations have come into play … those in the positions of power at the center ceaselessly tried to erode these limitations. They never succeeded, and for the reason that also seems to me to be tied to the international system: a limitation of power to act externally and the constant threat of foreign assault (the two characteristics of a multi-polar system) imply that power is also limited internally and must rely on autonomous centers of decision-making and so may use them only sparingly. (p. 78)

[^28]: The central characteristic of the modern natural law tradition (as represented by St. Thomas Aquinas, Luis de Molina, Francisco Suarez, and the late sixteenth century Spanish Scholastics, and the Protestant Hugo Grotius) was its thorough rationalism: its idea of universally valid, absolute, and immutable principles of human conduct that are—ultimately independent of any theological beliefs—to be discovered by and founded in and reason alone. “Man,” writes Frederick C. Copleston, [*Aquinas* (London: Penguin Books, 1955), pp. 213–14] cannot read, as it were, the mind of God … (but) he can discern the fundamental tendencies and needs of his nature, and by reflecting on them he can come to a knowledge of the natural moral law…. Every man possesses … the light of reason whereby he can reflect … and promulgate to himself the natural law, which is the totality of the universal precepts of dictates of right reason concerning the good which is to be pursued and the evil which is to be shunned.

> On the origin and development of the natural rights doctrine and its idea of justice and property (including all the statist failings and slips of its aforementioned heroes) see Richard Tuck, *Natural Rights Theories* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979); on the revolutionary character of the idea of natural law see Lord (John) Acton, *Essays on Freedom and Power* (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press. 1948); as an eminent contemporary natural rights philosopher see Henry Veatch, *Human Rights* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985).

[^29]: On the rise of the cities see C.M. Cipolla, *Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy 1000–1700* (New York: Norton, 1980), chap. 4\. Europe around 1000, writes Cipolla,

> was poor and primitive … made up of numberless rural microcosms—the manors…. Society was dominated by a spirit of resignation, suspicion, and fear toward the outside world…. The arts, education, trade, production, and the division of labor were reduced to a minimal level. The use of money almost completely disappeared. The population was small, production meager, and poverty extreme…. The prevailing ideas reflected a brutal and superstitious society—fighting and praying were the only respectable activities…. Those who labored were regarded as despicable serfs…. In this depressed and depressing world, the rise of cities between the tenth and thirteenth centuries represented a new element which changed the course of history. (p. 144)
> 
> At the root of urban growth was a massive migratory movement. (p. 145)
> 
> The town was to the people of Europe from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries what America was to Europeans in the nineteenth century. The town was the “frontier,” a new and dynamic world where people felt they could break their ties with an unpleasant past, where people hoped they could find opportunities for economic and social success, where sclerotic traditional institutions and discriminations no longer counted, and where there would be ample reward for initiative, daring, and industriousness (p. 146). In the feudal world, a vertical arrangement typically prevailed, where relations between men were dictated by the concepts of fief and service; investiture and homage; lord, vassal, and serf. In the cities, a horizontal arrangement emerged, characterized by cooperation among equals. (p. 148)

See also Henri Pirenne, *Medieval Cities* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1952), chap. 5; Michael Tigar and Madeleine Levy, *Law and the Rise of Capitalism* (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1977).

[^30]: See on this Carolyn Webber and Aaron Wildavsky, *A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World* (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986), pp. 235–41; Pirenne, *Medieval Cities*, pp. 179–80, pp. 227f.

[^31]: As the outstanding champion of this tradition see John Locke, *Two Treatises of Government*, ed. Peter Laslett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960).

> [E]very man has a property in his own person. This nobody has any right to but himself. The labour of his body and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the state that nature hath provided, and left in it, he hath mixed his labour with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property. It being by him removed from the common state nature placed it in, it hath by his labour something annexed to it that excludes the common right of other men. For this labour being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but he can have a right to what that is once joined to. (p. 305)

See also Ernest K. Bramsted and K.J. Melhuish, eds., *Western Liberalism* (London: Longman, 1978).

[^32]: See on these developments of economic theory Marjorie Grice-Hutchinson, *The School of Salamanca: Readings in Spanish Monetary History* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952); Raymond de Roover, *Business, Banking, and Economic Thought* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974); Murray N. Rothbard, “New Light on the Prehistory of the Austrian School” in Edwin Dolan, ed., *The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); on the outstanding contributions in particular of Richard Cantillon and A.R.J. Turgot see *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 7, no. 2 (1985) (which is devoted to Cantillon’s work) and Murray N. Rothbard, *The Brilliance of Turgot* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, Occasional Paper Series, 1986); see also Joseph A. Schumpeter, *A History of Economic Analysis* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1954).

[^33]: On the Industrial Revolution and its misinterpretation by the orthodox (school-book) historiography see F.A. Hayek, ed., *Capitalism and the Historians* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963).

[^34]: In fact, though the decline of liberalism began around the mid-nineteenth century, the optimism that it had created survived until the early twentieth century. Thus, John Maynard Keynes could write [*The Economic Consequences of the Peace* (London: Macmillan, 1919)]:

> What an extraordinary episode in the economic progress of man that age was which came to an end in August 1914! The greater part of the population, it is true, worked hard and lived at a low standard of comfort, yet were, to all appearances, reasonably contented with this lot. But escape was possible, for any man of capacity or character at all exceeding the average, into the middle and upper classes, for whom life offered, at a low cost and with the least trouble, convenience, comforts, and amenities beyond the compass of the richest and most powerful monarchs of other ages…. But, most important of all, he [man] regarded this state of affairs as normal, certain, and permanent, except in the direction of further improvement, and any deviation from it as aberrant, scandalous, and avoidable. The projects and politics of militarism and imperialism, of racial and cultural rivalries, of monopolies, restrictions, and exclusion, which were to play the serpent to this paradise, were little more than the amusements of his daily newspaper, and appeared to exercise almost no influence at all on the ordinary course of social and economic life, the internationalization of which was nearly complete in practice. (pp. 6–7)

For a similar account see also J.P. Taylor, *English History 1914–15* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965), p. 1.

[^35]: Characterizing nineteenth-century America Robert Higgs (*Crisis and Leviathan* [New York: Oxford University Press, 1987]) writes:

> There was a time, long ago, when the average American could go about his daily business hardly aware of the government—especially the federal government. As a farmer, merchant, or manufacturer, he could decide what, how, when, and where to produce and sell his goods, constrained by little more than market forces. Just think: no farm subsidies, price supports, or acreage controls; no Federal Trade Commission; no antitrust laws; no Interstate Commerce Commission. As an employer, employee, consumer, investor, lender, borrower, student, or teacher, he could proceed largely according to his own lights. Just think: no National Labor Relations Board; no federal consumer “protection” laws; no Securities and Exchange Commission; no Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; no Department of Health and Human Services. Lacking a central bank to issue national paper currency, people commonly used gold coins to make purchases. There were no general sales taxes, no Social Security taxes, no income taxes. Though governmental officials were as corrupt then as now—maybe more so—they had vastly less to be corrupt with. Private citizens spent about fifteen times more than all governments combined. (p. IX)

[^36]: On the following see in particular A.V. Dicey, *Lectures on the Relation Between Law and Public Opinion in England* (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books, 1981); Elie Halevy, *A History of the English People in the 19th Century*, 2 vols. (London: Benn, 1961); W.H. Greenleaf, *The British Political Tradition*, 3 vols. (London: Methuen, 1983–87); Arthur E. Ekirch, *The Decline of American Liberalism* (New York: Atheneum, 1976); Higgs, *Crisis and Leviathan*.

[^37]: On the worldwide excesses of statism since World War I see Paul Johnson, *Modern Times: The World from the Twenties to the Eighties* (New York: Harper and Row, 1983).

[^38]: On the relation between state and education see Murray N. Rothbard, *Education, Free and Compulsory: The Individual’s Education* (Wichita, Kans.: Center for Independent Education, 1972).

[^39]: On the relation between state and intellectuals see Julien Benda, *The Treason of the Intellectuals* (New York: Norton, 1969).

[^40]: On the following see in particular Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat*, chaps. 1, 5; idem, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chap. 8.