### 

Después de esta reconstrucción de lo clásico, y especialmente de la teoría del empleo austríaco, el dinero, el interés y el proceso capitalista, me referiré ahora a Keynes y su "nueva" teoría. Ante el telón de fondo de nuestra explicación de lo anterior, será fácil reconocer la "nueva" * Teoría general del empleo, el interés y el dinero </ i> de Keynes como fundamentalmente defectuosa y la revolución Keynesiana como una de los principales escándalos intelectuales del siglo XX. <sup id="fnref:23"><a href="#fn:23" class="footnote-ref"> 1 </ 1></p> 

<h4>
  Empleo
</h4>

<p>
  Keynes establece una teoría falsa del empleo. Contrariamente a la visión clásica, afirma que puede haber desempleo involuntario en el mercado libre; y, además, que un mercado puede alcanzar un equilibrio estable con un desempleo involuntario persistente. Y al afirmar que tales fallas de mercado son posibles, sostiene haber descubierto la justificación económica final para interferir en las operaciones de los mercados por fuerzas extra-mercado.
</p>

<p>
  Dado que el mercado libre se define en términos de propiedad privada homologada o producida y la voluntariedad de todas las interacciones entre propietarios privados, debe quedar claro que lo que Keynes afirma mostrar es más o menos equivalente a una cuadratura del círculo.
</p>

<p>
  Keynes empieza con un falso testimonio de que la teoría clásica asumía "en el sentido estricto, que no existía tal cosa como el desempleo involuntario."<fnref target="24" /> De hecho, no asumía tal cosa. La teoría clásica asume que el desempleo involuntario es lógicamente-praxiológicamente imposible en tanto el libre mercado esté funcionando. Que el desempleo involuntario, de hecho cualquier cantidad, puede existir en presencia de una institución de extra-mercado, leyes de salario mínimo, etc., nunca ha sido seriamente cuestionado.
</p>

<p>
  Después de esta falsedad, Keynes procede a dar su definición de desempleo involuntario:
</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Los hombres están involuntariamente desempleados si, en caso de un pequeño aumento en el precio de los bienes salariales [es decir, bienes de consumo] en relación con el salario en dinero, tanto la oferta agregada de mano de obra dispuesta a trabajar por el salario actual como el agregado la demanda a ese salario sería mayor que el volumen de empleo existente. <sup id="fnref:25"><a href="#fn:25" class="footnote-ref"> 3 </ 0></p> </blockquote> 
    
    <p>
      Traducido al inglés simple, lo que Keynes está diciendo en su forma típica de ofuscación es que los hombres están involuntariamente desempleados si un aumento en los precios en relación con las tasas salariales conduce a más empleo. <sup id="fnref:26"><a href="#fn:26" class="footnote-ref"> 4 </ 0> Sin embargo, tal cambio en los precios relativos es lógicamente equivalente a una caída en las tasas de los salarios reales; y los salarios pueden generar una caída en los salarios reales en el mercado libre de obstáculos en cualquier momento que lo deseen, simplemente aceptando tasas salariales nominales más bajas y manteniendo los precios de los productos básicos donde están. Si los trabajadores deciden no hacer esto, no hay nada involuntario en todo esto. Dada su demanda de reserva de mano de obra, eligen suministrar la cantidad de mano de obra que realmente se les suministró. Tampoco cambiaría un poco la clasificación de esto como desempleo-empleo voluntario, si en otro momento en el tiempo con menores tasas de salario real aumentara la cantidad de empleo. En virtud de la lógica, tal resultado solo puede lograrse si entretanto los trabajadores han aumentado su evaluación relativa de una tasa salarial dada versus su demanda de reserva laboral (de lo contrario, si no hubiera ocurrido tal cambio, el empleo disminuiría en lugar de aumentar). El hecho, sin embargo, de que uno pueda cambiar de opinión de un punto en el tiempo a otro no implica que la elección previa de uno fuera involuntaria, como lo haría Keynes. Por supuesto, uno puede definir los términos de uno modo que uno desee, y de una manera verdaderamente Orwelliana uno incluso puede optar por llamar voluntario involuntario e involuntario voluntario. Sin embargo, a través de este método cualquier cosa bajo el sol puede ser "probada", mientras que en realidad no se muestra nada de sustancia alguna. La forma de Keynes de demostrar la posibilidad de un desempleo involuntario es una prueba verbal sin sentido que no afecta por completo el hecho de que el empleo no involuntario, en el sentido habitual de este término, pueda existir en el mercado no intervenido.</p> 
      
      <p>
        Como si esto no fuera suficiente, Keynes lo supera alegando que el desempleo involuntario es concebible incluso en la tierra de nunca jamás del equilibrio. De hecho, critica su anterior <em>Tratado sobre el dinero</em> diciendo: "No había entendido entonces que, en ciertas condiciones, el sistema podría estar en equilibrio con un empleo inferior al pleno". <fnref target="27" /> Sin embargo, el equilibrio se <em>define</em> como una situación en la que los cambios en los valores, la tecnología y los recursos ya no se producen cuando todas las acciones se ajustan por completo a una constelación final de datos; y donde todos los factores de producción en ese momento, incluido el trabajo, se emplean en la mayor medida posible (dados estos datos invariables) y se emplean de manera repetida e interminable en el mismo patrón de producción constante. Por lo tanto, como ha señalado H. Hazlitt, el descubrimiento de un equilibrio de desempleo por Keynes, en su <em> Teoría General </em> , es como el descubrimiento de un círculo triangular, una contradicción en los términos. <fnref target="28" />
      </p>
      
      <h4>
        Dinero
      </h4>
      
      <p>
        Habiendo descartado la lógica en su tratamiento del empleo y el desempleo, Keynes, en su discusión sobre el dinero, descarta el razonamiento económico promoviendo el argumento de que el dinero y los cambios monetarios (pueden) tienen un efecto sistemático sobre el ingreso laboral y el interés.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Dado el hecho de que "dinero" aparece en el título de la <em> Teoría general, </em> la teoría positiva del dinero de Keynes es increíblemente breve y poco desarrollada. La brevedad, por supuesto, puede ser una virtud. En el caso de Keynes, ofrece la oportunidad de identificar con bastante facilidad sus errores elementales. Para Keynes, " <em> la importancia del dinero se deriva esencialmente de que es un vínculo entre el presente y el futuro </em> ." <fnref target="29" /> "El dinero en sus atributos significativos es, ante todo, un dispositivo sutil para vincular el presente y el futuro. " <fnref target="30" /> Que esto es falso se sigue del hecho de que en la tierra del nunca jamás del equilibrio no existiría dinero, <fnref target="31" /> Aún incluso en condiciones de equilibrio, todavía habría un presente y un futuro, y ambos seguirían estando vinculados. En lugar de funcionar como un enlace hacia el futuro, el dinero sirve como medio de intercambio; un papel que está inextricablemente ligado a la incertidumbre del futuro. <fnref target="32" /> La acción, que invariablemente comienza en el presente y apunta a algún objetivo futuro, más o menos distante en el tiempo desde el comienzo, constituye el vínculo real entre el presente y el futuro. Y es la preferencia temporal como una categoría de acción universal lo que le da a este vínculo entre el presente y el futuro su forma específica. El dinero, al contrario del interés, no relaciona más el presente con el futuro que otros fenómenos económicos, como los bienes no monetarios. Su valor actual también refleja anticipaciones con respecto al futuro, ni más ni menos que el dinero.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        A partir de este primer concepto erróneo sobre la naturaleza del dinero, todos los demás conceptos erróneos fluyen automáticamente. Definido como un vínculo sutil entre el presente y el futuro, la demanda de dinero (su oferta es dada), que Keynes, en línea con su inclinación general de malinterpretar categorías lógico-praxeológicas como psicológicas, denomina "preferencia de liquidez" o "propensión a acumulación, " <fnref target="33" /> se dice que está relacionado funcionalmente con la tasa de interés (y viceversa). <fnref target="34" /> “Interest,” writes Keynes, “is the reward of not-hoarding,”<fnref target="35" /> “the reward for parting with liquidity,”<fnref target="36" /> which makes liquidity preference in turn the unwillingness to invest in interest-bearing assets. That this is false becomes obvious as soon as one asks the question “What, then, about prices?” The quantity of beer, for instance, that can be bought for a definite sum of money is obviously no less a reward for parting with liquidity than is the interest rate, which would make the demand for money then the unwillingness to buy beer as much as it is an unwillingness to invest.<fnref target="37" /> Formulated in general terms, the demand for money is the unwillingness to buy or rent nonmoney, including interest-bearing assets (land, labor, and/or capital goods, or future goods) <em>and</em> non-interest-bearing assets (consumer or present goods). To recognize this is to recognize that the demand for money has nothing to do with investment or with consumption; nor has it anything to do with the ratio of investment-to-consumption expenditures, or the spread between input and output prices (the discount of higher order or future goods versus lower order or present goods). Increases or decreases in the demand for money, other things being equal, lower or raise the overall level of money prices, but real consumption and investment, as well as the real consumption-investment proportion remain unaffected; and such being the case, employment and social income remain unchanged as well. The demand for money determines the spending/cash balance proportion. The investment/consumption proportion, pace Keynes, is an entirely different and unrelated matter. It is solely determined by time-preference.<fnref target="38" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        The same conclusion is reached if changes in the supply of money (liquidity preference being given) are considered. Keynes claims that an increase in the supply of money, other things being equal, can have a positive effect on employment. He writes, “so long as there is unemployment, employment will change in the same proportion as the quantity of money.”<fnref target="39" /> Yet this is not only a highly curious pronouncement because it <em>assumes</em> the existence of unemployed resources instead of <em>explaining</em> why such a thing should possibly occur—for, obviously, a resource can be unemployed only because it is either not recognized as scarce at all and thus has no value whatsoever, or because its owner voluntarily prices it out of the market and its unemployment then is no problem that would call for a solution.<fnref target="40" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Even if one were to waive this criticism, the statement would still be fallacious. For if other things were indeed equal, then the additional supply of money would simply lead to increased overall prices and simultaneous and proportional increased wage rates, and nothing would change at all. If, contrary to this, employment should increase, this is only possible if wage rates do not rise along with, and to the same extent as, other prices. However, other things then can no longer be said to be equal, because real wage rates would be lowered, and employment can only rise while real wages fall if the relative evaluation of employment versus self-employment (i.e., unemployment) is assumed to have changed. Yet if this is assumed, no increase in the money supply would have been required. The same result (increased employment) could also have been brought about by laborers accepting lower nominal wage rates.
      </p>
      
      <h4>
        Interés
      </h4>
      
      <p>
        Con teoría económica y lógica lanzadas por la ventana, en su discusión sobre el fenómeno de interés Keynes abandona la la razón y el sentido común por completo.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        According to Keynes, since money has a systematic impact on employment, income, and interest, interest, in turn—quite consistently, for that matter—must be conceived of as a purely monetary phenomenon.<fnref target="41" /> I need not explain the elementary fallacy of this view. Suffice it to say here again that money would disappear in equilibrium, but interest would not, which demonstrates that interest must be considered a real, not a monetary phenomenon.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Moreover, Keynes, in talking about “functional relationships” and “mutual determination” of variables instead of causal, unidirectional relations, becomes entangled in inescapable contradictions as regards his theory of interest.<fnref target="42" /> As has been explained above, on the one hand Keynes thinks of liquidity preference (and the supply of money) as <em>determining</em> the interest rate, such that an increased demand for money, for instance, would raise the interest rate (and an increased supply of money would lower it) and that this then will reduce investment “whilst a decline in the rate of interest may be expected, <em>ceteris paribus</em>, to increase the volume of investment.”<fnref target="43" /> On the other hand, characterizing the interest rate as “the reward for parting with liquidity,” he contends that the demand for money is <em>determined</em> by the interest rate, such that a fall in the interest rate, for instance, would increase one’s demand for cash (and also, one should add, one’s propensity to consume) and hence lead to <em>reduced</em> investment. Obviously, however, a lower interest rate can hardly both increase and decrease investment at the same time. Something must be wrong here.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Keynes, however, combines falsehood and contradiction into one of the most fantastic conspiracy theories ever heard of.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Since interest, according to Keynes, is a purely monetary phenomenon, it is only natural to assume that it can be manipulated at will through monetary policy (provided, of course, one is not restricted in this by the existence of a 100-percent-reserve commodity money standard such as the gold standard).<fnref target="44" /> “There is,” writes Keynes, “no special virtue in the pre-existing rate of interest.”<fnref target="45" /> In fact, if the supply of money is sufficiently increased, the interest rate supposedly can be brought down to zero. Keynes recognizes that this would imply a superabundance of capital goods, and one would think that this realization should have given him cause to reconsider. Not so! On the contrary, in all seriousness he tells us
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          that a properly run community equipped with modern technical resources, of which the population is not increasing rapidly, ought to be able to bring down the marginal efficiency of capital in equilibrium approximately to zero within a single generation.<fnref target="46" />
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        It is “comparatively easy to make capital goods so abundant that the marginal efficiency of capital is zero (and) this may be the most sensible way of gradually getting rid of many of the objectional features of capitalism.”<fnref target="47" /> “There are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of capital.”<fnref target="48" /> Rather, it is “possible for communal saving through the agency of the State to be maintained at a level where it ceases to be scarce.”<fnref target="49" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Don’t worry that this would imply that no maintenance or replacement of capital would be needed any longer (for, if this were the case, capital goods would still be scarce and hence command a price), and capital goods instead would have to be “free goods” in the same sense in which air is usually “free.” Don’t worry that if capital goods were no longer scarce, then consumer goods could no longer be scarce either (for, if they were, the means employed to produce them would have to be scarce, too). And don’t worry that in this Garden of Eden, which Keynes promises to establish within one generation (why so long?!), there would no longer be any use for money. For, as he informs us, “I am myself impressed by the great social advantages of increasing the stock of capital until it ceases to be scarce.”<fnref target="50" /> Who would dare disagree with this! <fnref target="51" />
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Yet more is to come. Because, as Keynes sees it, there are some obstacles on the path toward paradise. For one thing, the gold standard stands in the way, because it makes the expansion of credit impossible (or difficult at least, in that a credit expansion would lead to an outflow of gold and a subsequent economic contraction). Hence Keynes’s repeated polemics against this institution.<fnref target="52" /> Furthermore, there is the just explained problem of his own making: that a lower interest rate supposedly increases and decreases investment simultaneously. And it is to get out of this logical mess that Keynes comes up with a conspiracy theory: For, while the interest rate must be reduced to zero so as to eliminate scarcity, as we were just told, the lower the interest rate the lower also the reward for parting with liquidity. The lower the interest rate, that is to say, the lower the incentive for capitalists to invest, because their profits will be reduced accordingly. Thus, they will try to undermine, and conspire against, any attempt to resurrect the Garden of Eden.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        Driven by “animal spirits,”<fnref target="53" /> “gambling instincts,”<fnref target="54" /> and “addicted to the money-making passion,”<fnref target="55" /> they will conspire so “that capital has to be kept scarce enough.”<fnref target="56" /> “The acuteness and peculiarity of our contemporary problem arises, therefore,” writes Keynes,
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          out of the possibility that the average rate of interest which will allow a reasonable average level of employment [and of social income] is one so unacceptable to wealth owners that it cannot be readily established merely by manipulating the quantity of money.<fnref target="57" />
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        In fact,
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          the most stable, and least easily shifted, element in our contemporary economy has been hitherto, and may prove to be in the future, the minimum rate of interest acceptable to the generality of wealth owners.<fnref target="58" />
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        Fortunately, we are informed, there is a way out of this predicament; through “the euthanasia of the rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital.”<fnref target="59" /> And surely they deserve such a fate. For “the business world” is ruled by an “uncontrollable and disobedient psychology,”<fnref target="60" /> and private investment markets are
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          under the influence of purchasers largely ignorant of what they are buying and of speculators who are more concerned with forecasting the next shift of market sentiment than with a reasonable estimate of the future yield of capital assets.<fnref target="61" />
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        As a matter of fact, don’t we all know that “there is no clear evidence from experience that the investment policy which is socially advantageous coincides with that which is most profitable;”<fnref target="62" /> indeed, that the decisions of private investors depend largely on “the nerves and hysteria and even the digestions and reactions to the weather,”<fnref target="63" /> rather than on rational calculation?! Thus, concludes Keynes, “the duty of ordering the current volume of investment cannot safely be left in private hands.”<fnref target="64" /> Instead, to turn the present misery into a land of milk and honey, “a somewhat comprehensive socialization of investment will prove the only means.”<fnref target="65" />
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          The State, which is in a position to calculate the marginal efficiency of capital-goods on long views and on the basis of the general social advantage [must take] an ever greater responsibility for directly organizing investment.<fnref target="66" />
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        I trust that none of this requires further comment. It is too obvious that these are the outpourings of someone who deserves to be called anything, except an economist.
      </p>
      
      <footnotes>
        <fn name="23">
          <p>
            For pro-Keynesian literature see in particular Seymour P. Harris, ed., <em>The New Economics</em> (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1947); Alvin Hansen, <em>A Guide to Keynes</em> (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1953); for anti-Keynesian literature see in particular Henry Hazlitt, <em>The Failure of the “New Economics”</em> (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1959); idem, ed., <em>The Critics of Keynesian Economics</em> (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1983).
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="24">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 21; also pp. 6, 15.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="25">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 15\. Keynes at this point promises an alternative definition to be given on p. 26; revealingly, no such definition appears there or anywhere else in the book!
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="26">
          <p>
            See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 30.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="27">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, pp. 242–43; also p. 28.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="28">
          <p>
            See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 52.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="29">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>General Theory</em>, p. 293.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="30">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 294.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="31">
          <p>
            Mises explains:
          </p>
          
          <blockquote>
            <p>
              Let us assume that there is only gold money and only one central bank. With the successive progress toward the state of an evenly rotating economy all individuals and firms restrict step by step their holding of cash and the quantities of gold thus released flow into nonmonetary—industrial—employment. When the equilibrium of the evenly rotating economy is finally reached, there are no more cash holdings; no more gold is used for monetary purposes. The individuals and firms own claims against the central bank, the maturity of each part of which precisely corresponds to the amount they will need on the respective dates for the settlement of their obligations. The central bank does not need any reserves as the total sum of the daily payments of its customers exactly equals the total sum of withdrawals. All transactions can in fact be effected through transfer in the bank’s books without any recourse to cash. Thus the “money” of this system is not a medium of exchange; it is not money at all; it is merely a <em>numéraire</em>, an ethereal and undetermined unit of accounting of that vague and indefinable character which the fancy of some economists and the errors of many laymen mistakenly have attributed to money. (<em>Human Action</em>, p. 249)
            </p>
          </blockquote>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="32">
          <p>
            Keynes recognizes that money also has something to do with uncertainty. The fundamental mistake in his theory of money pointed out here, however, surfaces again when he relates money not to uncertainty as such, but, more specifically, to uncertainty of interest rates. “The necessary condition” [for the existence of money] he writes, “is the existence of uncertainty as to the future rate of interest” (<em>General Theory</em>, p. 168; also p. 169). See also the following discussion.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="33">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 174.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="34">
          <p>
            On the absurd implications of the assumption of functional—rather than causal—relations, see the discussion below.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="35">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>La Teoría General</em>, p. 174.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="36">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 167.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="37">
          <p>
            Ver también Hazlitt, La Falla de las "Nuevas Economías", pp. 188f.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="38">
          <p>
            See also Rothbard, <em>America’s Great Depression</em>, pp. 40–41; Mises, <em>Human Action</em>, pp. 521–23.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="39">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 296.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="40">
          <p>
            See also W.H. Hutt, <em>The Theory of Idle Resources</em> (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1977).
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="41">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 173; see also his laudatory remarks on mercantilist economics, and in particular, Silvio Gesell, as precursors of this view on pp. 341, 355.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="42">
          <p>
            See on this also Rothbard, <em>Man, Economy, and State</em>, pp. 687–89.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="43">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 173.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="44">
          <p>
            See also below.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="45">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 328.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="46">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 220.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="47">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 221.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="48">
          <p>
            lbid., p. 376.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="49">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 376.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="50">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 325.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="51">
          <p>
            See also Hazlitt, <em>The Failure of the</em> “<em>New Economics,</em>” pp. 231–35\. What about the seemingly obvious objection, that the expansion of monetary credit through which Keynes wants to bring about the reduction of the interest rate to zero is nothing but an expansion of paper, and that the problem of scarcity is a matter of “real” goods, which can only be overcome through “genuine savings”? To this he has the following funny answer in <em>The General Theory</em>:
          </p>
          
          <blockquote>
            <p>
              The notion that the creation of credit by the banking system allows investment to take place to which “no genuine saving” corresponds, i.e., the idea that saving and investment … can differ from one another, is to be explained, I think, by an optical illusion. (p. 81)
            </p>
            
            <p>
              [T]he savings which result from this decision are just as genuine as any other savings. No one can be compelled to own the additional money corresponding to the new bank-credit unless he deliberately prefers to hold more money rather than some other form of wealth. (p. 83)
            </p>
            
            <p>
              The new money is not “forced” on anyone. (p. 328)
            </p>
          </blockquote>
          
          <p>
            As Henry Hazlitt remarks,
          </p>
          
          <blockquote>
            <p>
              [o]n the same reasoning we can create any amount of new “savings” we wish overnight, simply by printing that amount of new paper money, because <em>somebody</em> will necessarily hold that new paper money! (<em>The Failure of the “New Economics,”</em> p. 227)
            </p>
          </blockquote>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="52">
          <p>
            See Keynes, <em>The General Theory,</em> pp. 129ff., 336ff., 348f. On Keynes’s role in the actual destruction of the gold standard see Henry Hazlitt, <em>From Bretton Woods to World Inflation</em> (Chicago: Regnery, 1984).
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="53">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 161.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="54">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 157.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="55">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 374.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="56">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 217.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="57">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, pp. 308–09.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="58">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 309, and he adds, in a footnote, “The nineteenth-century saying, quoted by Bagehot, that ‘John Bull’ can stand many things, but he cannot stand 2 per cent.” On Keynes’s conspiracy theory see also Hazlitt, <em>The Failure of the “New Economics,”</em> pp. 3, 16–18.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="59">
          <p>
            Keynes, <em>The General Theory</em>, p. 376, also p. 221.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="60">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 317.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="61">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 316.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="62">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 157.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="63">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 162.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="64">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 320.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="65">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 378.
          </p>
        </fn>
        
        <fn name="66">
          <p>
            Ibid., p. 164.
          </p>
        </fn>
      </footnotes>