### El Problema del Fraude II: banca de reserva fraccional y libertad de contratación

La clasificación de Murray Rothbard de la banca de reserva fraccionaria como fraude fue el resultado de un largo e intenso estudio de la ética y la teoría de los derechos de propiedad en particular. Selgin y White consideran acertadamente que la economía es intelectualmente independiente y está separada de la ética. Puede estudiarse sin ningún conocimiento previo de la propiedad y la teoría de los derechos de propiedad. Sin embargo, no dudan en hacer pronunciamientos éticos radicales. En su defensa moral de la banca de reserva fraccional, Selgin y White casi nunca mencionan la propiedad, y mucho menos describen una teoría de la propiedad. Esto da como resultado una serie de errores y problemas fundamentales: confusión con respecto a la distinción entre propiedad y titulos de propiedad; confusión en cuanto a la (im) posibilidad de que algo (propiedad) sea poseído simultáneamente por más de un propietario; confusión sobre la prioridad lógica de la propiedad y la teoría de la propiedad en relación con la teoría contractual y contractual; y confusión con respecto a la necesidad de cumplir con las obligaciones contractuales propias con la propiedad propia (no solo de cualquier persona).

Estas dificultades entran en la discusión de los autores sobre el tema de la "libertad de contrato". Su argumento es directo.

> Si un banco no representa ni expresamente obliga a sí mismo para mantener las reservas de 100 por ciento, entonces las reservas fraccionarias no violan el acuerdo contractual entre el banco y su cliente ... . La prohibición de acuerdos contractuales voluntarios que permiten la tenencia fraccionada de reservas es, por lo tanto, una intervención en el mercado, una restricción a la libertad de contratación, que es un aspecto esencial de los derechos de propiedad privada. [^14]

Este pasaje revela nuevamente el ultra-subjetivismo ya notado de Selgin y White. De acuerdo con esta visión, son los acuerdos voluntarios los que hacen para-constituyen y definen-un contrato válido. In embargo, los contratos válidos son acuerdos sobre la transferencia de bienes inmuebles; por lo tanto, la gama de contratos válidos está, de hecho, en primer lugar limitada por la naturaleza de las cosas y la propiedad (y solo por acuerdo). Fue así que Hoppe (p. 70) explicó que

> La libertad de contratación no implica que * todos * contrato mutuamente ventajosa se debe permitir . La libertad de contrato significa, en cambio, que A y B deberían poder celebrar cualquier contrato * con respecto a sus propias propiedades * , pero la banca de reserva fraccionaria implica la celebración de contratos relacionados con la propiedad de terceros. [^15]

Selgin y White se refieren a este cargo de forma un tanto engañosa como "efectos de terceros" y lo contrarrestan cargando a Hoppe a su vez con una confusión elemental en cuanto a la naturaleza de los derechos de propiedad y de propiedad. Ellos dicen primero, que

> derrames de las acciones de otros al * valor * de la propiedad de C ... son un fenómeno de libre mercado ineludible y no una violación de los derechos de propiedad privada de C, [mientras que] * invasiones físicas * de la propiedad de C ... por supuesto son inconsistentes con la protección de los derechos de propiedad de C. Debería ser obvio que si A y B van a ser excluidos de cualquier transacción que simplemente afecte al * valor de mercado * de las posesiones de C, sin ninguna agresión física o amenaza contra la propiedad legítima de C o C, entonces los principios de la propiedad privada, la libertad de contrato y la competencia de libre mercado están completamente aniquiladas. Contexto | Contexto de solicitud. ¿B tiene prohibido vender grabaciones de discos compactos a A, simplemente porque al hacerlo reduce el valor de mercado del inventario de discos de vinilo de C? [^16]

En segundo lugar, afirman que la reducción del poder adquisitivo del dinero, que admiten que debe resultar de todas las emisiones de medios fiduciarios, es, como tal, un efecto de valor inofensivo y, por lo tanto, "no justifica legalmente la acción del banco". concluir que el argumento de Hoppe es "inválido" (e incompatible con la teoría de la propiedad de Rothbard).

El contraargumento de Selgin y White contiene dos errores. Primero, aunque la premisa principal es correcta, es falso que Hoppe se equivoque al respecto. Hoppe ha escrito extensamente sobre la teoría de los derechos de propiedad, y no solo es consciente de la distinción mencionada por Selgin y White, sino que incluso ofrece una defensa praxeológica de ella; por lo tanto, a este respecto, no existe diferencia de juicio alguna entre Rothbard y Hoppe. [^17]

En segundo lugar, la premisa menor es demostrablemente falsa (y, por lo tanto, también lo es la conclusión). Selgin y White afirman que la caída en el poder adquisitivo del dinero resultante de la emisión de medios fiduciarios es el mismo tipo de evento inofensivo que una caída en el precio de cualquier otra cosa (causada por cambios en la oferta y / o demanda). Los dueños de dinero pierden poder adquisitivo como resultado de la banca de reserva fraccionaria, afirman, no es diferente de la situación en la que los propietarios de papas o automóviles sufren una pérdida de valor debido a una mayor oferta o una menor demanda de papas y automóviles.

Una vez más, Selgin y White combinan dinero (oro), es decir, propiedad, y sustitutos del dinero (billetes), es decir, títulos de propiedad. Sin duda, la cuestión de los medios fiduciarios no conduce a daños físicos a los bienes inmuebles. Después de todo, un billete de banco es solo una hoja de papel, y el papel no ejerce ningún efecto físico relevante sobre el mundo externo. Pero lo mismo puede decirse también sobre el tema de los títulos fiduciarios para papas o automóviles (títulos respaldados por activos que no sean papas o automóviles). Ellos, también, son simplemente pedazos de papel, y como tales no tienen impacto en el mundo real. Sin embargo, existe una diferencia importante entre los cambios de posición de la riqueza del propietario de una patata o coche debido a los cambios en la oferta o demanda de papas o automóviles, por un lado, y los cambios producidos por cambios en la oferta o la demanda de títulos a no existente (sin cambios ) cantidades de papas o carros por otro lado. Contexto | Contexto de solicitud. Surely, the owners of potatoes or cars are affected differently in both cases. In the first case, if the price of potatoes or cars falls due to a larger potato or car supply, all current potato or car owners remain (unchangingly) in possession of the same quantity of property (potatoes or cars). No one’s physical property is diminished. Likewise, if the price falls because potato or car buyers are willing to offer only lesser quantities of other goods in exchange for potatoes or cars, this by itself has no effect on any current potato or car owner’s physical quantity of potatoes or cars. In distinct contrast in the second case, the issue and sale of an additional title to an unchanged quantity of potatoes or cars *does* lead to a quantitative diminution of some current potato or car owner’s physical property. It does not merely have a value-effect: the purchasing power of potato or car titles will fall. It does have a physical effect: the issuer and seller of fiduciary potato or car titles misappropriates other people’s potatoes or cars. He appropriates other people’s property without relinquishing any property of his own (in exchange for an empty property title).[^18]

### The Issue of Fraud III: The "Proof from Existence" Fractional Reserve Banking and State

Neither the title-transfer theory of contract nor the principle of freedom of contract supports the claim that the issue of fiduciary media and fractional reserve banking is ethically justified. To the contrary, only one other argument remains in support of the claim that fractional reserve banking represents a legitimate form of business.

The argument boils down to a proof from existence: X, Y, or Z exists; it would not exist if it were not beneficial; hence, it should exist (and outlawing it would be detrimental and morally wrong).

Thus, write Selgin and White:

> the group [of people] whose freedom of contract we are concerned with here is not a small eccentric bunch, but is the great mass of people who have demonstrated that they do prefer banks that operate on fractional reserves…. Depositors continue to patronize these banks, demonstrating their preference, for them.[^19]
> 
> … By the principle of demonstrated preference depositors must be presumed to benefit from the package they have agreed to accept, risk and all.[^20]
> 
> \[Consequently,\] \[if\] *any* person knowingly prefers to put money into an (interest-bearing) fractional-reserve account, rather than into a (storage-fee-charging) 100 percent reserve account, then a blanket prohibition on fractional-reserve banking by force of law is a binding legal restriction on freedom of contact in the market for banking services.[^21]
> 
> [Moreover,] … [b]enefits accrue to bank depositors and noteholders, who receive interest and services paid for by the extra bank revenue generated from lending out a portion of its liabilities. Benefits accrue to bank borrowers who enjoy a more ample supply of intermediated credit, and to everyone who works with the economy’s consequently larger stock of capital equipment. And benefits must accrue to bank shareholders, who could choose to have the bank not issue demand liabilities if they found the risks not worth bearing.[^22]

Selgin and White have here put the cart before the horse. The existence of a practice, however widespread, has no bearing on the question of whether it is justifiable or not. Consider first, for illustrative purposes, the following analogy concerning the ethical permissibility of a state, that is, of a territorial monopolist of law and order (or of justice and protection).[^23]

In the words of Selgin and White (applied here in a different context and paraphrased), the group of people whose freedom of contract we are concerned with is not a small eccentric bunch, but is the great mass of people who have demonstrated that they do prefer states (judges and protectors) that operate on a monopolistic basis. Territorial inhabitants continue to patronize these states, demonstrating their preference for them. By the principle of demonstrated preference, territorial inhabitants must be presumed to benefit from the package they have agreed to accept, risk and all. Consequently, if any person knowingly prefers to put money into a tax-bearing state account, rather than into a protection-fee-charging account in nontaxing justice and protection agencies, then a blanket prohibition on state-formation by force of law is a binding legal restriction on freedom of contract in the market for justice and protection services. Moreover, benefits accrue to state depositors and noteholders, who receive interest and services paid for by the extra state revenue generated from employing parts of the deposits for extra tax collections. Benefits accrue to state borrowers who enjoy a more ample supply of intermediated credit, and to everyone who works with the economy’s consequently larger stock of capital equipment. And benefits must accrue to state shareholders, who could choose to have the state not engage in taxation if they found the risks not worth taking.

Given their own libertarian credentials, Selgin and White would presumably reject this analogy as false and inappropriate. But if so, why? What is it that invalidates the second *proof*, but not the first? What if anything, makes a blanket prohibition (or permission) of fractional reserve banking categorically different from a blanket prohibition (or permission) of state formation and operation?

The answer—that no such difference exists and that both proofs are equally invalid—is to be found in the Rothbardian principle of demonstrated preference. While Selgin and White invoke this principle in support of their conclusion regarding the ethical permissibility of fractional reserve banking, they miss its implication. The principle of demonstrated preference, as explained by Rothbard in his celebrated “Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics,” *presupposes* property rights. Not all demonstrated preferences are ethically permissible or socially beneficial. Instead, the only such preferences that are permissible and welfare enhancing are these that are expressed by means of one’s own property and nothing but one’s own property. Every preference demonstration by means of property other than one’s own—with other people’s property—is impermissible and nonbeneficial.

As for the demonstrated preference for states, it runs afoul of Rothbard’s principle. In Rothbard’s analysis, which is presumably accepted by the participants on both sides of the current debate, the violation can be quickly pinpointed. Private property, as the result of acts of (original) appropriation and/or production, implies the owner’s right to exclusive jurisdiction regarding his property, including the right to employ this property in defense against possible invasions and invaders. Indeed, there can be no property without an owner’s right to physical defense, and it is the very purpose of private property to establish separate domains of exclusive jurisdiction. No private-property owner can possibly surrender his right to ultimate jurisdiction over and defense of his property to someone else—unless he sells or otherwise transfers his property (in which case someone else would have exclusive jurisdiction over it). That is, so long as something (a good) has not been abandoned, its owner must be presumed as retaining these rights; and as far as his relations to others are concerned, every property owner may then only partake in the advantages of the division of labor and seek better and improved protection of his unalterable property rights through cooperation with other owners of property. Every property owner can buy from, sell to, or otherwise contract with everyone else concerning supplemental property protection and security services. Yet each owner also may at any time unilaterally discontinue any such cooperation with others. In distinct contrast, a territorial monopoly of protection and jurisdiction—a state—implies that every property owner is prohibited from discontinuing his cooperation with his protector, and that no one (except the monopolist) may exercise ultimate jurisdiction over his own property. Rather, everyone except the monopolist has lost his right to defense and is thus rendered defenseless vis-à-vis his own protector. Obviously, such an institution stands in contradiction to every owner’s demonstrated preference of not giving up his property. Contrary to their demonstrated preference, the monopolist prohibits the people from using their property in physical defense against possible invasions by himself and his agents. A monopoly of protection and jurisdiction rests thus from the outset on an impermissible act of expropriation (taxation) and provides the monopolist and his agents with a license to further expropriation and taxation. Every owner’s range of permissible actions regarding his own property, and hence the value of his property, is diminished, whereas the monopolist’s range of action and control is correspondingly enlarged and his exclusive privilege is reflected in an increase in the value of his property (capitalization of monopoly profit).

Presently, states exist everywhere, and almost everyone resides under state *protection*. Regardless of this preference demonstration, however, there is nothing wrong, ethically or economically, with blanket protection against state formation. No one may form a state, for the same reason that no one may expropriate or rob anyone else. In a court of law, it would be sufficient that a single property owner objected to the monopoly’s existence, and the monopolist would have to cease in his current operation as a tax-yielding protection agency and be repaired to the legal status of a nontaxing but fee-charging law-and-security agency (a normal specialized firm). A tax-yielding protection agency is a contradiction in terms—an invasive protector—and must be forbidden, irrespective of any benefits accruing to state depositors, state borrowers, and state owners. To do so is not a legal restriction on freedom of contract in the market for justice and protection services, but the very presupposition of freedom of contract and justice. Everyone putting money or any other resources into a tax-yielding protection account is engaged in unlawful action and subject to punishment.

Just as states exist everywhere, so do fractional reserve banks, and nowadays practically everyone is banking with fractional reserve banks. What, if anything, is the difference between the status of a state and that of a fractional reserve bank? Why should fractional reserve banks not be outlaw banks just as states outlaw protection agencies? To be sure, just as there can be no doubt concerning a demand for protection services, there can also be no doubt as to a demand for banking services. Yet the demand for protection services that private property owners may properly demonstrate does not include a demand for tax-yielding protection services, as we have seen. It exclusively permits a demand for fee-charging protection agencies. Why should an analogous distinction not be true also for banking services? Why should a demand for interest-yielding demand deposit accounts not be just as impermissible as the demand for tax-yielding protection accounts, on the ground that both interest-yielding deposit accounts and tax-yielding property protection are contradictions in terms? Why should the functions of a money warehouser and clearing institution (100-percent-reserve-deposit banking) and as an intermediary of credit (savings-and-loan banking) not be the only just forms of banking (just as fee-charging protection agencies are the only legitimate form of protection)?

[^14]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 87.

[^15]: Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?”, p. 70.

[^16]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 92–93.

[^17]: For instance, Hans-Hermann Hoppe (“From the Economics of Laissez-Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. [Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988], pp. 69ff.); and White’s review of Hoppe (Lawrence White, “Review of *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard,*” *Journal of Economic Literature* (June 1990): 664–65).

[^18]: Also see note 7 above. We will also show that these authors’ meaning of demand for (and supply of) money is misconceived. An increased demand for money (or potatoes or cars) is not just a wish to have more money (or potatoes), but greater *effective* demand.

[^19]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 95.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 93.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 88.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 94.

[^23]: To avoid any misunderstanding, the term monopoly is employed here in its Rothbardian definition as an exclusive privilege (or the absence of free entry). A monopoly of law and order means that one may turn for justice and protection only to one party—the state—and that it is exclusively this party that determines the content of justice and protection.