### From Commodity Money to Paper Money: De Devolution of Money

If money fit turn commodity money, how em fit becom paper money? Em do am thru de development of oda type of money (paper name to commodity money)¬¬- but thru mago mago and only at de price of economic failure.

For unda commodity money standard like for gold standard till em reach 1914, money “circulate” for one hand for de form of standard metal bars and gold coins for different value take dey buy and sell against one anoda for some kind fix percentage according to dia weight and d quantity of de metal. For anoda side, to dey reduce de cost to take dey store tins (safekeeping) and to dey deal wit how to clear money, wey dey de stage wey resemble de one dem take dey transfer de title of property- wey include stock and bond certificate- as method dem take dey fasten exchange wey involve *non* money goods for de world for de main time, as em dey side by side wit money normal and gold certificate- property titles (claims) to particula amount of gold dem put for particula bank- wey dem dey use take exchange. De way gold monie and oda form of money dey affect de total way dem supply money- for any certificate put am to dey circulate for de same amount wey gold be comot am de way em dey circulate (deposit)- wey nor be people income and dia how dia property spread. Yet no doubt say, de way money dey exist wit one anoda and oda form of money and de possibility to dey hold money for any of de form and de different combination of dat form con join comfortable wey em add to person wey dey participate for de market. Dis na how de inbuilt piece of paper wey no get value fit turn to wetin get power take buy stuff. If na dat extend dey show no condition to dey claim money and if na de extend as no doubt dey say dem still dey useful and recover for any time, dem dey buy dey sell paper ticket *as if* say na real money- dem dey trade am against de equal level. Once dem don gada purchasing power and con deny dem of dia nature as form of money (use one kind dey remove to recover dem), dem fit continue to dey work as money. As Mises put am:

> Before good dem take dey trade begin to dey serve as money em go don already get exchange-value base on some oda levels pass de function em dey serve as money. But money wey dey serve like dat still dey valuable even wen de original source em exchange-value don stop to dey exist.[^9]

After all, people wey like demself fit *wan* deny paper tickets of dia character as title to money? Dem fit *wan* suspend to recover con put inside worthless pieces of paper as monie? People wey dey support paper money like Milton Friedman say na so em be, and dem normally dey quote de motive to dey save as de reason for dia replacement of paper (controlled money) for commodity money: De standard for gold involve to dey waste tins wey dey required for de digging and minting of de gold. Dem suppose dey consider big effort put am to take produce money.[^10] wetin important na to use paper wey no too cost instead of gold, dat kind wastage go disappear, and dem go release effort to take dey produce direct important goods for producers and consumers. But na paper money (controlled money) big economic use wey dey explain de present reason why de people for de world abandon commodity monie. But na so? Say paper money dey dominate mean say na becos of to dey save well? Em fit reason am say fit be? Fit really be say people wey get interest for demself really *wan* save as people wey dey support paper money dey think?

Some kind deep investigation show say dis tin no possible, and say de body wey dey manage paper money need different reason- wey no dey harm but evil- agenda: Reason economy wey dey operate wit money wit (at least) one bank and money kor kor (“outside money” for diz era language) and oda form of money too (“inside monie”) wey dey circulate. If people wey get hand for market wan really save for de cost to dey use commodity money (wit de main goal to remove gold as money but to use paper), person go seea am first- like em near dia aim- dem go wan give uo to dey use outside money (gold). Dem go dey do everitin wit inside money (paper), and money wey dey outside dem go put am for bank and dem go kukuma comot am to dey circulate (If not, as far as say better money still dey go round, dos people wey dey use gold coin go do one kind tin wit how dem do tins- say dem *no* wan save for de cost wey follow de use.)

Howeva, em dey possible say oda type of money fit remove and replace genuine money as means of exchange? Even many people wey dey support paper money don dey agree say em possible. The reason be say oda forms of money be *substitutes* and em get one permanent and confirm disadvantage if you compare am to normal money. Dem fit collect paper notes (claims for money) for de level and extent wey dem pay de deposit fee to dat deposit body. To dey provide security and to clear service na expensive business, and deposit fee na de price, dem dey pay for money dem guide. If dem bring paper note to redeem something afta de date reach wey dem pay for de sageguarding fees by de original or former payer, de institution dem put de money dem go input collection card and dat kind note go con trade for discount against normal money. De disadvantage wey oda forms of money get be say dem must dey continually redeposit and re-give order to dey maintain dia character as money- to sell for de same level- and becos of dix nature dem dey only function as money for de main time and time being. Only proper money (gold coins) suppose dey permanent to dey function as means dem take dey exchange. Normally, aside say inside money dey eva displace outside money, dem suppose expect de issue of oda form of money to get less freedom- dem suppose only dey use am for big amount of money and for business concerning people wey dey sell everiday- but de big population go dey use money to dey buy most of their things, em go con dey show dia like for *nor* to dey save as Friedman reason am.[^11].

Afta all, even if person con reason am becos of argument say na only inside money dey circulate but dem store all de better money for bank, de wahala wey concern paper money no end for here. To dey sure, de way dem dey look de matter dey simple enough: All commodity money dey idle for bank. Em for no better if dem use all dis idle gold instead of say dem dey use am for chopping or produce tins- to treat teeth or jewelry- but dem con dey reason say de means dem take dey exchange con dey less costly- infact, for practice no cost- paper money? Nor be am.

First, the envisioned demonetization of gold certainly cannot mean that a bank thereby assumes ownership of the entire money stock, while the public gets to keep the notes. No one except the bank owner would agree to that! No one would want *such* savings. In fact, this would not be savings at all but an expropriation of the public by and to the sole advantage of the bank. No one could possibly *want* to be expropriated by somebody else. (Yet the expropriation of privately owned commodity money through governments and their central banks is the only method by which commodity money has ever been replaced by fiat money.) Instead, each depositor would want to retain ownership of his deposits and get his gold back.

Then, however, an insurmountable problem arises: Regardless who—the bank or the public—now owns the notes, they represent nothing but irredeemable paper. Formerly, the cost associated with the production of such paper was by no means only that of printing paper tickets, but more importantly that of attracting gold depositors through the provision of safeguarding and clearing services. Now, with irredeemable paper there is nothing worth guarding anymore. The cost of money production falls close to zero, to mere printing costs. Previously, with paper representing claims to gold, the notes had acquired purchasing power. But how can the bank or the public get anyone to accept them now? Would they be bought and sold for nonmoney goods at the formerly established exchange ratios? Obviously not. At least not as long as no legal barriers to entry into the note-production business existed; for under competitive conditions of free entry, if the (nonmoney) price paid for paper notes exceeded their production costs, the production of notes would immediately be expanded to the point at which the price of money approached its cost of production. The result would be hyperinflation. No one would accept paper money anymore, and a flight into *real values* would set in. The monetary economy would break down completely and society would revert back to a primitive, highly inefficient barter economy. Out of barter then, once again a new (most likely a gold) commodity money would emerge (and the note producers once again, so as to gain acceptability for their notes, would begin backing them by this money). What a way of achieving savings!

If one is to succeed in replacing commodity money by fiat money, then, an additional requirement must be fulfilled: Free entry into the note-production business must be restricted, and a money *monopoly* must be established. A single paper money producer is also capable of causing hyperinflation and a monetary breakdown. However, insofar as he is legally shielded from competition, a monopolist can safely and knowingly restrict the production of his notes and thus assure that they retain their purchasing power. He then presumably would assume the task of *redeeming* old notes at par for new ones, as well as that of again providing safeguarding and clearing services in accepting note deposits in exchange for his issuance of substitutes of notes—demand deposit accounts and checkbook money—against a depositing fee.

Regarding this scenario, several related questions arise. Formerly, with commodity money every person was permitted to enter the gold mining and coining business freely—in accordance with the assumption of self-interested, wealth-maximizing actors. In contrast, in order for Friedman’s “fiat money dividend” to come into existence, competition in the field of money production would have to be outlawed and a monopoly erected. Yet how can the existence of a legal monopoly be reconciled with the assumption of self-interest? Is it conceivable that self-interested actors could agree on establishing a fiat money monopoly in the same way as they can naturally agree on participating in the division of labor and on using one and the same commodity as a medium of exchange? If not, does this not demonstrate that the cost associated with such a monopoly must be considered higher than all attending resource cost savings?

To raise these questions is to answer them. Monopoly and the pursuit of self-interest are incompatible. To be sure, a reason why someone might want to become the money monopolist exists. After all, by not having to store, guard and redeem a precious commodity, the production costs would be dramatically reduced and the monopolist could thus reap an extra profit. By being legally protected from all future competition, this monopoly profit would immediately become “capitalized” (reflected permanently in an upward valuation of his assets), and on top of his inflated asset values he then would be guaranteed a normal rate of return in the form of interest. Yet to say that such an arrangement would be advantageous to the monopolist is not to say that it would be advantageous to anybody else, and hence that it could arise naturally. In fact, there is no motive for anyone wanting *anyone but himself* to be this monopolist, and accordingly no agreement on the selection of any particular monopolist would be possible. The position of a monopolist can only be arrogated—enforced against the will of all excluded nonmonopolists. By definition, a monopoly creates a distinction between two classes of individuals of different legal quality: between those—privileged—individuals who are permitted to produce money, and those—subordinate—ones who, to the exclusive advantage of the former, are prohibited from doing the same. Such an institution *cannot* be supported in the same voluntary way as the institutions of the division of labor and a commodity money. It is *not*, as they are, the “natural” result of mutually advantageous interactions, but that of an unilaterally advantageous act of expropriation (abrogation). Accordingly, instead of relying for its continued existence on voluntary support and cooperation, a monopoly requires the threat of physical violence.[^12]

Moreover, the incompatibility of self-interest and monopoly does not end once the monopoly has been established but continues as long as the monopoly remains in operation. It cannot but operate inefficiently and at the expense of the excluded nonmonopolists. First, under a regime of free competition (free entry), every single producer is under constant pressure to produce whatever he produces at minimum costs, for if he does *not* do so, he invites the risk of being outcompeted by new entrants who produce the product in question at lower costs. In contrast, a monopolist, shielded from competition, is under no such pressure. In fact, since the cost of money production includes the monopolist’s own salary as well as all of his nonmonetary rewards, a monopolist’s “natural” interest is to *raise* his costs. Hence, it should be expected that the cost of a monopolistically provided paper money would very soon, if not from the very outset, *exceed* those associated with a competitively provided commodity money.

Furthermore, it can be predicted that the price of monopolistically provided paper money will steadily increase and the purchasing power per unit money, and its quality will continuously fall. Protected from new entrants, every monopolist is always tempted to raise price and lower quality. Yet this is particularly true of a money monopolist. While other monopolists must consider the possibility that price increases (or quality decreases) due to an elastic demand for their product may actually lead to reduced revenues, a money monopolist can rest assured that the demand for his particular product—the common medium of exchange—will be highly inelastic. Indeed, short of a hyperinflation, when the demand for money disappears entirely, a money monopolist is practically always in a position in which he may assume that his revenue from the sale of money will increase even as he raises the price of money (reduces its purchasing power). Equipped with the exclusive right to produce money and under the assumption of self-interest the monopoly bank should be expected to engage in a steady increase of the money supply, for while an increased supply of paper money does not add anything to social wealth—the amount of directly useful consumer and producer goods in existence—but merely causes inflation (lowers the purchasing power of money), with each additional note brought into circulation the monopolist can increase *his* real income (at the expense of lowering that of the non-monopolistic public). He can print notes at practically zero cost and then turn around and purchase *real* assets (consumer or producer goods) or use them for the repayment of *real* debts. The real wealth of the non-bank public will be reduced—they own less goods and more money of lower purchasing power. However, the monopolist’s real wealth will increase—he owns more non-money goods (and he always has as much money as he wants). Who, in this situation, except angels, would *not* engage in a steady expansion of the money supply and hence in a continuous depreciation of the currency?

It may be instructive to contrast the theory of fiat money as outlined above to the views of Milton Friedman, as the outstanding modern champion of fiat money.

While the younger Friedman paid no systematic attention to the question of the origin of money the older Friedman recognizes that, as a matter of historical fact, all monies originated as commodity monies (and all money substitutes as warehouse claims to commodity money), and he is justly skeptical of the older Friedrich A. Hayek’s proposal of competitively issued fiat currencies.[^13] However, misled by his positivist methodology Friedman fails to grasp that money (and money substitutes) *cannot* originate in any other way and accordingly that Hayek’s proposal must fail.

In contrast to the views developed here, throughout his entire work Friedman maintains that a commodity money in turn would be “naturally” replaced by a—more efficient, resource cost saving—fiat money regime. Amazingly, however, he offers no argumentative support for this thesis, evades all theoretical problems, and whatever argument or empirical observation he does offer *contradicts* his very claim. There is, first off, no indication that Friedman is aware of the fundamental limitations of replacing outside money by inside money. Yet if outside money cannot disappear from circulation, how, except through an act of expropriation, can the link between paper and a money commodity be severed? The continued use of outside money in circulation demonstrates that it is *not* regarded as an inferior money; and the fact that expropriation is needed for the decommoditization of money would demonstrate that fiat money is *not* a natural phenomenon!

Interestingly, after evading the problem of explaining how the suspension of redeemability can possibly be considered natural or efficient, Friedman quite correctly recognizes that fiat money cannot, for the reasons given above, be provided competitively but requires a monopoly. From there he proceeds to assert that “the production of fiat currency is, as it were, a natural monopoly.”[^14] However, from the fact that fiat money requires a monopoly, it does not follow that there is anything “natural” about such a monopoly and Friedman provides no argument whatsoever as to how any monopoly can possibly be considered the natural outcome of the interactions of self-interested individuals. Moreover, the younger Friedman in particular appears to be almost completely ignorant of classical political economy and its antimonopolistic arguments: the axiom that if you give someone a privilege he will make use of it, and hence the conclusion that every monopolistic producer will be inefficient (in terms of costs as well as of price and quality). In light of these arguments it has to be regarded as breathtakingly naive on Friedman’s part first to advocate the establishment of a governmental money monopoly and then to expect this monopolist *not* to use its power, but to operate at the lowest possible costs and to inflate the money supply only gently (at a rate of 3–5 percent per year). This would assume that, along with becoming a monopolist, a fundamental transformation in the self-interested nature of mankind would take place.

Having had extensive experience with his own ideal of a world of pure fiat currencies as it came into existence after 1971 and looking back on his own central resource cost savings argument for a monopolistically provided fiat money of nearly four decades earlier, it is not surprising that the older Friedman cannot but acknowledge that his predictions turned out blatantly false.[^15] Since abolishing the last remnants of the gold commodity money standard, he realizes, inflationary tendencies have dramatically increased on a worldwide scale; the predictability of future price movements has sharply decreased; the market for long-term bonds (such as consols) has been largely wiped out; the number of investment and “hard money” advisors and the resources bound up in such businesses have drastically increased; money market funds and currency futures markets have developed and absorbed significant amounts of real resources which otherwise—without the increased inflation and unpredictability—would not have come into existence at all or at least would never have assumed the same importance that they now have; and finally it appears that even the direct resource costs devoted to the production of gold accumulated in private hoards as a hedge against inflation have increased.[^16] But what conclusion does Friedman draw from this empirical evidence? In accordance with his own positivist methodology according to which science is prediction and false predictions falsify one’s theory, one should expect that Friedman would finally discard his theory as hopelessly wrong and advocate a return to commodity money. Not so. Rather, in a remarkable display of continued ignorance (or arrogance), he emphatically concludes that none of this evidence should be interpreted as “a plea for a return to a gold standard. On the contrary I regard a return to a gold standard as neither desirable nor feasible.”[^17] Now as then he holds onto the view that the appeal of the gold standard is merely “nonrational, emotional,” and that only a fiat money is “technically efficient.”[^18] According to Friedman, what needs to be done to overcome the obvious shortcomings of the current fiat money regime is find

> some anchor to provide long-term price predictability, some substitute for convertibility into a commodity or, alternatively some device that would make predictability unnecessary. Many possible anchors and devices have been suggested, from monetary growth rules to tabular standards to the separation of the medium of exchange from the unit of account. As yet, no consensus has been reached among them.[^19]

[^9]: Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, p. 111.

[^10]: See Friedman, “Essays in Positive Economics, p. 210; idem, *A Program for Monetary Stability*, pp. 4–8; idem, *Capitalism and Freedom* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), p. 40.

[^11]: Indeed, historically this has been the case: Traditionally, notes have always been widely distrusted, and their acceptability—as compared to that of genuine money such as gold or silver coins—was severely limited.

::::In order to increase the popularity of money substitutes two complementary measures were actually required: First, the note-issuing depositing institution had to overvalue deposit notes against genuine money by either charging no depositing fee or by even paying interest on deposits. Secondly, because the guarding of money is actually *not* costless and deposited money *cannot* possibly generate an interest return, the bank, in order to cover its otherwise unavoidable losses, had to engage in fractional reserve banking, i.e., it had to issue and bring into circulation new, additional deposit tickets that, while physically indistinguishable from any other notes, were actually not covered by genuine money.

::::On the ethical and economic status of the practice of fractional-reserve banking see the section, “From Deposit and Loan Banking to Fractional-Reserve Banking: The Devolution of Credit,” below.

[^12]: It might be argued that a monopoly agreement would be possible (conceivable), if the monopolistic bank of issue were owned by—and its profits distributed to—everyone. Wouldn’t everyone, then, not just the monopolist, profit from the savings of substituting paper for gold?

::::In fact, such an agreement is illusionary. Joint ownership of the monopoly bank would imply that tradeable stock certificates must be issued and distributed. But who should get how much stock? Bank clients, according to their deposit size? Yet all private holders of notes help save on gold and would want to be included among the bank owners according to the size of their note holdings. What about the owners and sellers of nonmoney goods? In showing themselves willing to accept paper instead of gold, they, too, play their part in the resource cost savings. But how in the world is one to determine how many shares to award *them* when their contribution consists, as it does, of various quantities of heterogeneous consumer and producer goods? Here, at the very latest it would become impossible to reach agreement.

::::Moreover, why would any new market participant—any later deposit, note and/or nonmoney good owner *not* initially endowed with bank stock—want to consent to and support this arrangement? Why should he *pay* for banking stock, while it was distributed to the initial wealth owners free of charge, even though he is now involved in resource cost savings just as much as they were then? Such an arrangement would involve a systematic redistribution of income and wealth in favor of all initial wealth owners and at the expense of all later ones. Yet if new additional bank stock were issued for each new deposit, note, or nonmoney good owner, such stock would be worthless from the outset and any bank offering it would be a nonstarter.

::::In addition, as will be explained below, regardless of how the ownership problem is resolved, the very operation of the bank will—indeed *must*—have effects on the interpersonal income and wealth distribution.

[^13]: See Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?” *Journal of Monetary Economics* (1986); for Hayek’s proposal see his *Denationalization of Money* (London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1976).

[^14]: See Friedman, *Essays in Positive Economics*, p. 216; also Friedman and Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?”

[^15]: Milton Friedman, “The Resource Cost of Irredeemable Paper Money,” *Journal of Political Economy* (1986).

[^16]: Monetarists had predicted that, as the result of the demonetization of gold and the transition to a pure fiat money system, the price of gold would fall—from the then official rate of $35 per ounce to an estimated nonmonetary value of gold of around $6\. In fact, the price of gold rose. At one point it reached $850 per ounce, and for most of the time it has lingered between $300 and $400\. As of this writing the price is $375.

[^17]: Friedman, “The Resource Cost of Irredeemable Paper Money,” p. 648.

[^18]: Friedman, *Essays in Positive Economics*, p. 250.

[^19]: Friedman, “The Resource Cost of Irredeemable Paper Money,” p. 646; also idem, *Money Mischief Episodes in Monetary History* (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992), chap. 10.

::::Among the suggestions for an alternative fiat money “anchor” recently considered by Friedman, the “frozen monetary base rule” deserves a brief comment (see Friedman, “Monetary Policy for the 1980s” in *To Promote Prosperity*, John H. Moore, ed. [Stanford: Hoover Institution, 1984]). In one respect this rule represents an advance over his earlier 3 to 5 percent monetary growth rule. His advocacy of the latter rule was based essentially on the erroneous proto-Keynesian notion that money constitutes part of social capital, such that an economy cannot grow by 5 percent unless it is accommodated to do so by a proportional increase in the money supply. In contrast, the frozen monetary base rule indicates a recognition of the old Humean insight that any supply of money is equally optimal or, in Friedman’s own words, that money’s “usefulness to the community as a whole does not depend on how much money there is (Friedman, *Money Mischief*, p. 28). Otherwise, the proposal represents no advance at all, for how in the world can a monopolist be expected to follow a frozen monetary base rule any more than a less stringent 3 to 5 percent growth rule?

::::Moreover, even if this problem were solved miraculously, this would still not alter the monopoly’s character as an instrument of unilateral expropriation and income and wealth redistribution. The monopolist, apart from offering depositing and clearing services (for which his customers would pay him a fee), would also have to perform the function, for customers and noncustomers alike, of replacing old, worn-out notes—one-to-one and free of charge—with new, identical ones (otherwise, who would want to replace a permanent commodity money by a perishable fiat money?). However, while the costs associated with this task may be low, they are definitely not zero. Accordingly, in order to avoid losses and recoup his expenses, the monopolist cannot but *increase* the monetary base—and hence one would essentially be back at the older monetary growth rule.
