###

Yet Rothbard nor dey content afta im develop full economic defense for pure market system. As im reach de end of im second biggest work wey be De Ethics of Liberty for 1982, im still go ahead to give us ogbonge system of ethics wey help complete de task to justify laissez faire.

Mises, togeda with some social scientists, accept de Humean verdict wey say reason fit be and e fit nor pass de slave of passions. Dat is to say reason abi science nor fit do more dan make e inform us weda certain means dey appropriate make e bring certain result abi end abi e nor dey appropriate at all.  E dey beyond de powers of reason, sha, make im teach us wich end make we choose abi wich end fit or nor fit dey justified. Ultimately, de ends wey dem choose dey artbitrary from a scientific point of view; na matter of emotional whims dem be. If we wan dey sure Mises, just like oda Economist, dey committed to one kin utilitarianism lik dat. E favour life over say make person die, e favour health over sickness, e favour abundance ova poverty. And insofar as far as dat kin tin end, de real goal wey dem use achieve de highest possible standard of living for everybody, na oda people dey share am, as e assume say dem dey, as an economic scientist Mises recommend say de correct course of action wey dem suppose choose na de policy of laissez-faire.[^9] And doubtlessly, as far as economics fit talk plenty tins lik dis, de case for laissez-faire na very important one. However, what if people nor consider prosperity make e be dia ultimate goal?As Rothbard take point out, economic analysis only show day laissez-faire go lead to higher standard of living as time dey go on. As time dey go, however, person go still die. Why e go cum dey quiet reasonable make person argue say while person agree wit everything wey economics talk, person go still dey concerned about im welfare as time dey go and for dere, nor economist go fit deny am, abi na subsidy go be de nicest tin? Moreover, why social welfare go be de first concern of person as time dey go? Shey people nor fit advocate poverty, weda na as ultimate value abi as a means wey dem go use bring out ultimate value like equality? De answer, of course, na say dem make dat kin proposal. However, anytime wey dem dey, nor be say economics nor get anytin to talk, but according to Mises with oda utilitarians, dem say nortin more dey wey dem fit talk at all, since no reasonable, scientific way dey wey dem fit use choose between values wey dey conflicting, since all of dem dey ultimately arbitrary.[^10]

[^9]: On top dis, check Mises, Human Action, pp. 153–55.

[^10]: For Rothbard’s Mises-critique check Murray N. Rothbard, The Ethics of Liberty (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982), pp. 205–12.

Against dis position Rothbard cum takes side wit de philosophical tradition of rational ethics wey claim say reason dey capable make e yield cognitive value statements wey dey  regarded to proper ends of man.[^11] More specifically, he cum align imsef wit de natural  law abi natural rights  tradition of philosophic thoughts wey hold say universally valid norms fit dey discerned wit reasons as dem take dey for grounded for de nature of man. [^12] De Ethics of Liberty cum present de full case wey dey de libertarian property norms as de real rules. 


[^11]: For various cognitivist approaches wey dey  towards ethics, make I check Kurt Baier, The Moral Point of View: A Rational Basis of Ethics (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1961); Marcus Singer, Generalization in Ethics (New York: A. Knopf, 1961); Paul Lorenzen, Normative Logic and Ethics (Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969); Stephen Toulmin, The Place of Reason in Ethics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970); Friedrich Kambartel, ed., Praktische Philosophie and konstruktive Wissenschaftstheorie (Frankfurt/M: Athenäum, 1974); Alan Gewirth, Reason and Morality (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978).

[^12]: For de natural rights tradition, make u check John Wild, Plato’s Modern Enemies and the Theory of Natural Law (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953); Henry Veatch, Rational Man: A Modern Interpretation of Aristotelian Ethics (Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1962); idem, For An Ontology of Morals: A Critique of Contemporary Ethical Theory (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1971); idem, Human Rights: Fact or Fancy? (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985).

If we wan agree with Rothbard on top de possibility wey dey rational ethic and, more specifically, on top de fact say only libertarian ethics go dey morally justified, I propose approach wey dey different and wey dey non-natural wey dem go take use establish dis two claims wey dey related. E don turn to common quarrel wit d natural rights  position, even for de part of readers wey dey sympathetic,  say de concept of human nature dey "too diffuse and e dey varied make e provide determinate set of contents of natural law.”[^13] Furthermore, im description of rationality dey equally ambiguous bcus e nor dey as if e distinguish between de role of reason wey e establish empirical law of nature for one hand and normative law of human conduct for anoda hand.[^14] Avoiding dat kin difficulties from de beginning, I claim say de following approach go dey more straightforward and rigourous as regards were e start from and de method wey e use derive conclusions. Moreover, as I go take explain later, my approach even dey more inline wit Rothbard own when e cum to say we wan justify de specific norms wey dey libertarianism  instead of de vague methodological  prescription wey natural right theorist do.[^15]

[^13]: Alan Gewirth, *Law, Action, and Morality*, in Rocco Porreco, ed., *Georgetown Symposium on Ethics: Essays in Honor of Henry B. Veatch* (New York: University Press of America, 1984), p. 73.

[^14]: Check de discussion wey dey inside Veatch, Human Rights, pp. 620–67.

[^15]: As I take disassociate mysef comot from de natural rights tradition nor mean say I nor fit agree wit de critical assessment of most of de contemporary ethical theory- in fact I agree wit Veatch’s complementary refutation of all desire—(teleological, utilitarian) ethics even wit all duty (deontological) ethics (ibid., chap. 1). And nor be say I claim say e no dey possible make dem interpret my own approach as de one wey dey fall  for "rightly conceived" natural rights tradition afterall (check inside footnote 17 below). Wetin I claim, be say de following approach dey  out of line wit wetin de natural rights approach don turn to, and say e nor owe anytin to dis tradition as e take dey lik dis.

Make I start by asking say wetin dey wrong wit de position wey Mises take and wit many odas wey de choice between dem de values dey ultimately arbitrary? First, make we note say dat kin position dey assume  say at least  de question of say weda or not value judgement abi normative statement go dey justified na cognitive problem. If to say dem nor assume am, Mises no go fit talk wetin e dey talk abi wetin e dey claim say na em be de case. Em position nor fit exist as arguable intellectual position.

For de begining of details, dis one nor fit take person very far. Indeed, e still look like far cry from dis insight to de proof  say dem fit justify normative and say na only de libertarian ethic dem fit defend. Dis impression dey wrong, however, dem don already win plenty for here pass wetin person suspect. De argument show us say any truth wey dem claim, de claim wey dey connected wit any proposition wey be true, objective abi valid (we fit use any one wey we want), and dem must raise and settle am as de argument take dey go. Since we nor fit dispute say na like dis e dey (person nor fit communicate and argue say person nor fit communicate and argue), and since we fit assume say everybody know wetin e mean to claim say sumtin na true (person nor fit deny dis statement unless e claim say de opposite na true), de way dem dey call dis fact na "the a priori of communication and argumentation."[^16]

[^16]: check K.O. Apel, “Das Apriori der Kommunikationsgemeinschaft und die Grundlagen der Ethik,” in idem, Transformation der Philosophie (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1973), vol. 2; also Jürgen Habermas, “Wahrheitstheorien,” in Helmut Fahrenbach, ed., Wirklichkeit und Reflexion (Pfullingen: Neske, 1974); idem, Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1981), vol. 1, pp. 44ff.; idem, Moralbewusstsein und kommunikatives Handeln (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1983).

Arguing nor consist of free-floating propositions wey dey claim say na true e be. Instead, argument na activity wey dey always  go on, too. However, as per say dem dey raise and settle truth claims  for inside argument and say argument, aside from anytin wey e be wey dem talk for de course, na practical affair, e follow say intersubjectively meaningful norms must exist— especially de ones wey turn some action into argumentation— wey get special cognitive status as per say dem be de practical  preconditions  of  objectivity  and truth.

And so, person go reach de conclusion say dem must assume say dos norms dey justifiable as valid. E dey impossible make we argue odawise, bcus de ability wey person go argue lik dat go in fact presuppose de validity of dos norms wey underlie any argument. In contradistinction to de natural rights theorists, though, person go see say de answer to de question of wich ends dem fit abi dem fit nor justify nor fit dey deduced  from de narrower one of de argument.[^17] Wit dis, de peculiar role of reason wey dem go use determine de contents of ethics wey dem fit give precise description. Contrary to de role of reason wey dem fit use establish empirical laws of nature, wey dem fit use determine moral law reason fit claim to yield results wey dem fit show say na valid a priori. E only make explicit de tin wey dem  don already imply for de concept of argumentation, and if dem wan analyse any actual norm proposal em task dey confined to analyse weda or not e dey logically consistent wit dey ethics wey de proponent must presuppose as valid as far as e go fit make em proposal at all.[^18]

[^17]: Of course, since de capability of argumentation na essential feature of human being - person nor fit talk anytin about de latter witout de former - dem fit also argue say norms wey dem nor fit defined effectively as de argumentation nor dey compatible wit human nature.

[^18]: Methodologically, dis approach get close resemblance to wetin Gewirth don describe as de "dialectically necessary method" (Reason and Morality, pp. 42-47) - a method of a priori reasoning wey dem model after de Kantian idea of transcendental deductions. Unfortunately sha, for em important study Gewirth choose de wrong point wey he suppose start for em analyses. He attempt make e derive ethical system from dat action instead of from de concept of argumentation. Upon dat, dis one nor fit work, bcus from de correct face wey dem state say for action an agent must, thru necessity, presuppose de existence of certain values abi goods, e nor folo say dat kin goods dey universalizable and so, make odas respect am as de goods of de agent by right. Gewirth fit don notice de ethical "neutrality" of action had it been he nor dey painfully aware of de existence of de "pure science of action" abi "praxeology" wey dey in existence as Mises take espouse am. Incidentally, de awareness of praxeology fit don spare am from many mistakes wey dem derive from em faulty distinction wey dey between might “basic,” “additive” and “non-subtractive” goods (ibid., pp. 53–58). Rather, de idea of truth abi of universalizable rights or goods go only show wit argumentation as special subclass of actions, but nor be wit action lik dat, as dem clearly  reveal wit de fact say Gewirth, too, nor dey engaged for action but more specifically for argumentation if e wan convince us of de necessary truth wey dey em ethical system. However, as dem don recognise argumentation as de one and only starting point for de dialectically necessary method, a libertarian (as in, de one wey nor be Gewirthian) ethic follows, as we go take see.

::::On to de faultiness wey Gewirth’s wan take use derive universalizable rights from de notion of action, make you check de perspective remarks wey Alasdair MacIntyre do, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory (London: Duckworth, 1981), pp. 64–65; Habermas, Moralbewusstsein und kommunikatives Handeln, pp. 110–11; and Veatch, Human Rights, pp. 159–60.

But wetin be de strictures of ethics wey dem imply for argumentation wey be say dem nor fit dispute em validity  bcus if dem dispute am, e go implicitly presuppose  am? Quite normally dem don observe say argumentation imply  say one proposition dey claim universal  acceptability abi shey na norm proposal  make e be “universalizable.” Applied to norm proposals, this is the idea, as formulated in the Golden Rule of ethics or in the Kantian Categorical Imperative, that only those norms can be justified that can be formulated as general principles which without exception are valid for everyone.[^19] Indeed as it is implied in argumentation that everyone who can understand an argument must in principle be able to be convinced by it simply because of its argumentative force, the universalization principle of ethics can now be understood and explained as implied in the wider a priori of communication and argumentation.[^20] Yet the universalization principle only provides one with a purely formal criterion for morality. To be sure, checked against this criterion, all proposals for valid norms which would specify different rules for different classes of people could be shown to have no legitimate claim of being universally acceptable as fair norms, unless the distinction between different classes of people were such that it implied no discrimination but could instead be accepted as founded in the nature of things again by everybody. However, while some norms might not pass the test of universalization, if enough attention were paid to their formulation, the most ridiculous norms (and what is more relevant even openly incompatible norms) could easily and equally well pass it. For example, “everybody must get drunk on Sundays or else he will be fined” or “anyone who drinks any alcohol will be punished” are both rules that do not allow discrimination among groups of people and thus could both claim to satisfy the condition of universalization.

[^19]: See the works cited in footnotes 11 and 12 above.

[^20]: See the works cited in footnote 16 above.

Clearly then, the universalization principle alone would not provide one with any positive set of norms that could be demonstrated to be justified. However, there are other positive norms implied in argumentation apart from the universalization principle. In order to recognize them, it is only necessary to call to mind three interrelated facts. First, that argumentation is not only a cognitive but also a practical affair. Second, that argumentation, as a form of action, implies the use of the scarce resource of one’s body. And third, that argumentation is a conflict-free way of interacting—not in the sense that there is always agreement on the things said, but in the sense that as long as argumentation is in progress, it is always possible to agree at least on the fact that there is disagreement about the validity of what has been said. This is only to say that a mutual recognition of each person’s exclusive control over his own body must be assumed to exist as long as there is argumentation (note again that it is impossible to deny this and claim this denial to be true without implicitly having to admit its truth).

Hence, one would have to conclude that the norm implied in argumentation is that everybody has the right to exclusively control his own body as his instrument of action and cognition. It is only as long as there is at least an implicit recognition of each individual’s property right in his or her own body that argumentation can take place.[^21] Only if this right is recognized is it possible for someone to agree to what has been said in an argument and can what has been said be validated, or is it possible to say no and to agree only on the fact that there is disagreement. Indeed, anyone who would try to justify any norm would have to presuppose the property right in one’s body as a valid norm, simply in order to say this is what I claim to be true and objective. Any person who would try to dispute the property right in one’s own body would become caught up in a contradiction.

[^21]: It might be noted here that only because scarcity exists is there even a problem of formulating moral laws; insofar as goods are superabundant (free goods), no conflict over the use of goods is possible and no action-coordination is needed. Hence, it follows that any ethic, correctly conceived, must be formulated as a theory of property, i.e., a theory of the assignment of rights of exclusive control over scarce means, for only then does it become possible to avoid otherwise inescapable and unresolvable conflicts. Unfortunately, moral philosophers in their widespread ignorance of economics have hardly ever seen this clearly enough. Rather, like Veatch (*Human Rights*, p. 170), for instance, they seem to think that they can do without a precise definition of property and property rights only to then necessarily wind up in a sea of vagueness and adhoceries.

::::On human rights as property rights see also Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty*, chap. 15.

Thus it can be stated that whenever a person claims that some statement can be justified, he at least implicitly assumes the following norm to be justified: “nobody has the right to uninvitedly aggress against the body of any other person and thus delimit or restrict anyone’s control over his own body.” This rule is implied in the concept of argumentative justification. Justifying means justifying without having to rely on coercion. In fact, if one formulated the opposite of this rule (i.e., everybody has the right to uninvitedly aggress against other people [a rule, by the way, that would formally pass the universalization test!]), then it is easy to see that this rule is not and never could be defended in argumentation. To do so would presuppose the validity of precisely its opposite (i.e., the aforementioned principle of nonaggression).

It may seem that with this justification of a property norm regarding a person’s body not much is won, as conflicts over bodies, for whose possible avoidance the nonaggression principle formulates a universally justifiable solution, make up only a small portion of all possible conflicts. However, this impression is not correct. To be sure, people do not live on air and love alone. They need a smaller or greater number of other goods as well simply to survive—and only he who survives can sustain argumentation, let alone lead a comfortable life. With respect to all of these other goods norms are needed too, as it could come to conflicting evaluations regarding their use. In fact, any other norm now must be logically compatible with the nonaggression principle in order to be justified and, *mutatis mutandis*, every norm that could be shown to be incompatible with this principle would have to be considered invalid. In addition, as the things for which norms have to be formulated are scarce goods—just as a person’s body is a scarce good—and as it is only necessary to formulate norms at all because goods are scarce and not because they are particular kinds of scarce goods, the specifications of the nonaggression principle, conceived as a special property norm referring to a specific kind of good, must already contain those of a general theory of property.

I will first state this general theory of property as a set of rulings applicable to all goods, with the goal of helping to avoid all possible conflicts by means of uniform principles, and I will then demonstrate how this general theory is implied in the nonaggression principle. According to the nonaggression principle a person can do with his body whatever he wants as long as he does not thereby aggress against another person’s body. Thus, that person could also make use of other scarce means, just as one makes use of one’s own body, provided these other things have not already been appropriated by someone else but are still in a natural unowned state. As soon as scarce resources are visibly appropriated—as soon as somebody “mixes his labor” with them, as John Locke phrased it,[^22] and there are objective traces of this—then property (the right of exclusive control), can only be acquired by a contractual transfer of property titles from a previous to a later owner, and any attempt to unilaterally delimit this exclusive control of previous owners or any unsolicited transformation of the physical characteristics of the scarce means in question is, in strict analogy with aggressions against other people’s bodies, an unjustifiable action.[^23]

[^22]: John Locke, *Two Treatises on Government*, ed. Peter Laslett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), esp. vols. II, V.

[^23]: On the nonaggression principle and the principle of original appropriation see also Rothbard, *For A New Liberty*, chap. 2; idem, *The Ethics of Liberty*, chaps. 6–8.

The compatibility of this principle with that of nonaggression can be demonstrated by means of an *argumentum a contrario*. First, it should be noted that if no one had the right to acquire and control anything except his own body (a rule that would pass the formal universalization test), then we would all cease to exist and the problem of the justification of normative statements simply would not exist. The existence of this problem is only possible because we are alive, and our existence is due to the fact that we do not, indeed cannot accept a norm outlawing property in other scarce goods next to and in addition to that of one’s physical body. Hence, the right to acquire such goods must be assumed to exist. Now if this is so and if one does not have the right to acquire such rights of exclusive control over unused, nature-given things through one’s own work (by doing something with things with which no one else has ever done anything before), and if other people have the right to disregard one’s ownership claim to things which they did not work on or put to some particular use before, then this is only possible if one can acquire property titles not through labor (i.e., by establishing some objective, intersubjectively controllable link between a particular person and a particular scarce resource), but simply by verbal declaration, by decree.[^24] However, the position of property titles being acquired through declaration is incompatible with the above justified nonaggression principle regarding bodies. For one thing, if one could indeed appropriate property by decree, this would imply that it would also be possible for one to simply declare another person’s body to be one’s own. Clearly enough, this would conflict with the ruling of the nonaggression principle which makes a sharp distinction between one’s own body and the body of another person. Furthermore, this distinction can only be made in such a clear-cut and unambiguous way because for bodies, as for anything else, the separation between “mine and yours” is not based on verbal declarations, but on action. The observation is based on some particular scarce resource that had in fact—for everyone to see and verify because objective indicators for this existed—been made an expression or materialization of one’s own will or, as the case may be, of somebody else’s will. More importantly, to say that property could be acquired not through action but through a declaration would involve an obvious practical contradiction because nobody could say and declare so unless his right of exclusive control over his body as his own instrument of saying anything was in fact already presupposed, in spite of what was actually said.

[^24]: This is the position taken by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, when he asks us to resist attempts to privately appropriate nature-given resources by, for example, fencing them in. He says in his famous dictum; “Beware of listening to this impostor, you are undone if you once forget that the fruits of the earth belong to us all, and the earth itself to nobody” (“Discourse upon the Origin and Foundation of Inequality Among Mankind,” in Jean-Jacques Rousseau, *The Social Contract and Discourses*, ed. G.D.H. Cole [New York: 1950], p. 235). However, to argue so is only possible if it is assumed that property claims can be justified by decree. How else could “all” (even those who never did anything with the resources in question) or “nobody” (not even those who made use of it) own something unless property claims were founded by mere decree?

As I intimated earlier, this defense of private property is essentially also Rothbard’s. In spite of his formal allegiance to the natural rights tradition, Rothbard, in what I consider his most crucial argument in defense of a private property ethic, not only chooses essentially the same starting point—argumentation—but also gives a justification by means of a priori reasoning almost identical to the one just developed. To prove the point I can do no better than simply quote:

> Now, *any* person participating in any sort of discussion, including one on values, is, by virtue of so participating, alive and affirming life. For if he were *really* opposed to life, he would have no business continuing to be alive. Hence, the *supposed* opponent of life is really affirming it in the very process of discussion, and hence the preservation and furtherance of one’s life takes on the stature of an incontestable axiom.[^25]

[^25]: Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty*, p. 32; on the method of a priori reasoning employed in the above argument see also, idem, *Individualism and the Philosophy of the Social Sciences* (San Francisco: Cato Institute, 1979); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen sozialforschung. Untersuchungen zur Grundlegung von Soziologie und Ökonomie* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag 1983); idem, “Is Research Based on Causal Scientific Principles Possible in the Social Sciences? *Ratio* (1983); supra chap. 7; idem, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chap. 6.
