### Rationalism and Relativism for de Natural and Social Sciences


Philosophical rationalism dey claim say man dey capable to dey recognize ultimate foundation and principles of knowledge. E recognize say all knowledge wey must dey presuppose as-far-as one dey argue about any knowledge claim whatever (and so nor go fit be meaningfully disputed because na de precondition of meaningful doubt) na ultimately justified or one priori valid. De law of contradiction na one example of such knowledge. Moreover, philosophical rationalism dey assert that wey base on de recognition of such ultimate truths, man dey capable of systematic scientific progress.

Relativism dey deny de existence of absolute foundations of knowledge and de possibility of scientific progress.

E appear to be little or no evidence wey support relativism for de natural sciences. E dey undeniable say de history of de natural sciences don be one of continuous progress, and say man don achieve mastery over nature far wey surpass dat of bygone ages. Moreover, disciplines such as prepositional logic, arithmetic, Euclidean geometry, rational mechanics (classical mechanics without gravitation), and chronometry, all of which dem don term “protophysics,” provide perfect example of de rationalist idea of ultimately knowledge wey dem don find. Logic and protophysics must dey presuppose if one wan talk anything wey get meaning at all, or if one wan make empirical measurement of space, time and material and so nor go fit possibly dey invalidated by human experience or measurement. (Euclidean geometry, for instance, nor go fit talk to dey falsified by de theory of relativity because de establishment of de theory of relativity presuppose de validity of Euclidean geometry for de construction of de measurement instrument.) 

On de contrary, for full agreement with de claims of rationalism, e appear say na precisely de status of logic and protophysics as absolutely a priori don justified theories wey make progress for de empirical natural sciences systematically possible.[^1]

[^1]: For dis in particular Paul Lorenzen, *Methodisches Denken* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968); idem, *Normative Logic and Ethics* (Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969),

::::> Geometry, chronometry and hylometry [rational mechanics] na a priori theories wey make empirical measurement of space, time and material ”possible.” Dem need to dey established before physics for de modern sense of all empirical science, with e hypothetical field of forces, fit begin. Therefore, igo like to call dis three disciplines by de common name: *protophysics*. De true sentence of protophysics na those sentences wey dey  defendable on de basis of logic, arithmetic and analysis, definitions and de ideal norms wey make measurements possible. (p. 60)

::::Also see Peter Janich, *Die Protophysik der Zeit* (Mannheim: Biblographisches Institut,1969); Friedrich Kambartel,*Erfahrung and Struktur* [Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968]).

Dis view of de natural science and their development don come under criticism for de time of Thomas Kuhn’s book wey dem celebrate dat time, *The Structure of Scientific Revolution*.[^2] For detailed analysis of de central episodes for de history of de empirical natural sciences, Kuhn for there challenged de view say de process of scientific development fit dey described as e dey progress towards de truth gradually through one series of hypothetical conjectures, crucial experiments, and de elimination of theories wey dey falsified experimentally, with every future generation go know pass the previous one. Instead, according to Kuhn e don be one noncumulative, nonteleogical process. Different “paradigms” or fundamental views of de essence of nature wey dem  follow and wey supplant one another as temporary orthodoxies, with each paradigms immune from, and irrefutable by, experience, and different paradigms incommensurable with each other. Shifts of paradigms nor dey motivated by incontrovertible experience but dey akin to religious conversions. Old paradigms die out as de scientist wey don promote dem die away; new ones take their place as new generation of scientists, wey conversion fever infect,  grow up, with each generation kon dey gain new knowledge from one new creed wey dem adopt as well as kon lose old knowledge of paradigms of past generation wey dem abandon.

[^2]: Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970; also Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave, eds., *Criticism and de Growth of Knowledge* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970).

Kuhn’s work, that time, call for one revision of de rationalist interpretation of de natural sciences  and establish one case for relativism? While Kuhn dey inclined to think so, and while others, mostly Paul Feyerabend,  don even radicalized Kuhn’s relativistic aspirations to one “methodological anarchism” with de battle cry “anything goes,”[^3] there go fit be little doubt say neither Kuhn, Feyerabend, or anyone else don successfully persuade de general public outside of de ivory towers of academia to accept one relativistic model of de natural sciences. Now as before, de general public dey convinced of de views of rationalism, and justly so.

[^3]: See Paul Feyerabend, *Against Method* (London: New Left Books, 1975); idem, *Science in a Free Society* (London: New Left Books, 1978); idem, *Wissenschaftals Kunst* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1984).

Dis nor be to talk say some partial truth nor dey wey dey for Kuhn’s and Fayerabend’s often investigations  wey dey fascinating. Na certainly true, and noteworthy, say losses of knowledge go fit occur even for de natural sciences, and say e dey therefore profitable to study not only de most recent publications for person field but also  de writings of authors wey don die past and forget sef. E dey also true say motives such as power, prestige, income, animosity and friendship nor dey become inoperative once people turn to de study of nature. (Who, for instance dey ready to abandon one theory wey be say im don commit e entire life work to de development only because de world around dey increasingly dey defect to another incompatible paradigm?) indeed, as one economist person fit go even further  and admit de possibility of scientific regression: One process of capital consumption, follow by lower standards of living, reduced population, disintegration of markets, and de division of labour, don dey occur repeatedly for de history of mankind go inevitably result to drop in man knowledge of nature.

Yet even when dem don talk all dis, rationalism’s claim nor dey affected for de least. For one thing, Kuhn’s and Fayerabend’s  relativism surely nor go fit dey extend to logic and protophysics. If one wan make meaningful proposition, or any measurement at all, “anything” nor dey  go. Such disciplines, wey incidentally don remain outside de scope of Kuhns’s and Feyerabend’s considerations, dey *absolutely*indispensable for *any* empirical natural science (and not irrefutable paradigms capable of substitution by other, incommensurable ones). Anyhow as e be, once dis dey recognised, and once e dey understood say proposition-making, counting,de construction of measurement instruments, and measuring, all of which make de empirical natural science dey possible, na purposeful activities, e immediately become clear say de paradigms of natural science must dey conceive of as means toward some universal, indispensable human end, and dat say dem must dey commensurable as regards their efficiency to take attain dis end.[^4]

[^4]: See on dis also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “On Praxeology and the Praxeological Foundation of Epistemology and Ethics,” in Jeffrey Herbener, ed., *The Meaning of Ludwig von Mises* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991).

De relativistic impression of de development of de empirical natural science dat Khun and Feyerabend try to carry go fit dey traced to de fact say dem both misconceive scientific theories as ordinary system of verbal propositions and systematically ignore their foundation for de reality of action. Only if one regard theory as say e dey completely detached from action nai any single theory nor  go only become immunizable, but any two rival theories wey their respective terms  nor go fit reduce to and define in terms of each other  must then appear incommensurable completely so as to exclude any rational choice between dem. Anyhow as e be, dis nor affect de refutability of any one theory, or de commensurability of one paradigm wey be rival, for de entire different level when dem take dey apply dem for de reality of actions, to dey use dem as instruments for de attainment of one practical purpose. For de level of ordinary words, paradigms fit de irrefutable and incommensurable, but in practice dem  never go fit  be. In fact, one go fit nor even state say any single paradigms dey irrefutable or any two paradigms dey incommensurable and for which respect, unless one presupposed one common categorical framework wey go fit serve as de basis for such assessment or comparison. Na dis *practical* refutability and commensurability of de paradigms of de empirical natural sciences dey explain de possibility of technological progress.

In systematically ignoring the fact that theories and theoretically interpreted observations are those of an actor, built and made in order to act successfully, Kuhn and Feyerabend have deprived themselves of the very criterion against which all knowledge concerning nature is continually tested and commensurated: the criterion of successfully reaching a set goal by applying knowledge in a given situation, or of failing to do so. Without the criterion of instrumental success, relativism would be inescapable. Yet in each of our actions visà-vis nature, we confirm the claim of rationalism that one can identify a range of applications for some theoretical knowledge and test it for its success within this range, and hence, that competing theories must be considered commensurable as regards such ranges of application and success. No situation is conceivable in which it would be rational to give up an intellectual tool which had once proven successful in a range of applications if no better tool were available. Yet if a superior tool were available, for example, a theory or paradigm that allowed one to reach a goal that could not be reached equally successfully by applying another, incompatible theory, it would be irrational for an actor not to adopt it. To be sure, such irrational behavior is empirically possible. However, whoever chose it would have to pay a price for doing so. He would deprive himself of the ability to achieve goals that he otherwise could accomplish, and isolated from all social contexts which might offer other, socio-psychological reasons not to adopt it, alone vis-à-vis nature, no one capable of distinguishing between successful and unsuccessful action would ever want to pay such a price. It is this which explains the unacceptability of a relativist view of the natural sciences and the possibility of the actually observable continuous—if at times for socio-psychological reasons somewhat erratic—progress in man’s mastery of nature, which Kuhn and Feyerabend would declare nonexistent, although all the while it seems to be staring them in the face.[^5]

[^5]: See also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1989): esp. 190–92; Wolfgang Stegmüller, *Hauptströmungen der Gegenartsphilosophie* (Stuttgart: Kröner, 1975), vol. 2, chap. 5, esp. pp. 523ff.

The situation is very different if one turns from the natural to the social sciences. Here the claims of rationalism seem to find far less support, and relativism has gained widespread public acceptance.[^6]

[^6]: See Martin Hollis and Steven Lukes, eds., *Rationality and Relativism* (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1982).

Foremost among the indicators cited in support of relativism is the observation that there is nothing in the development of the social sciences resembling the progress which has been achieved in the natural sciences. While our predictive powers and instrumental control over nature have dramatically increased since the times of Plato and Aristotle, the development of the empirical social sciences has been characterized by a standstill. In spite of the availability of all sorts of technical gadgets, such as high-speed computers, it appears that we are in no better position today to predict social events or to planfully bring about social change than were Plato or Aristotle in their days. (One might note that even if the validity of this observation is admitted, the relativistic conclusion to which it allegedly leads does not directly follow. It only follows if it is presupposed that the criteria for progress in the social sciences are indeed identical to those in the natural sciences. Proponents of social relativism take this for granted, yet it is by no means obvious why this should be so. On the contrary, in the natural sciences the object of knowledge [nature] and the subject of this knowledge [an actor] are different separate entities. In the social sciences, on the other hand, the objects of knowledge and research are themselves knowers and researchers. In light of this categorical difference, it would seem anything but clear why the methodology appropriate for the natural and the social sciences could possibly be one and the same. In fact, it is entirely unsurprising that when it comes to predicting predictors, or instrumentally controlling instrumental controllers, there *cannot* be any systematic progress of the kind observed in the natural sciences! [^7])

[^7]: See Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung. Untersuchungen zur Grundlegung von Soziologie und Ökonomie* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1983), esp. pp. 30–32; on methodological dualism see also Ludwig von Mises, *Human Action: A Treatise on Economics* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966), p. 18; idem, *Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985), pp. 1–2, 38–41; further, K.O. Apel, *Die Erklären: Verstehen Kontroverse in transzendental-pragmatischer Sicht* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1979).

Moreover, proponents of relativism usually point out, apparently there is no analogue in the social sciences to the role played by logic and protophysics as the a prioristic foundations of the empirical natural sciences. The rationalist claim, associated in particular with the “natural law” tradition, that such an analogue is provided by economics and ethics,[^8] has either been forgotten and disappeared from public consciousness or is dismissed out of hand: Economics, it is held, is an empirical science very much like physics, with the objective of producing predictive knowledge, but unlike physics it fails to deliver the promised goods. As regards the observation that prosperous as well as poor societies exist, which would seem to make room for economic explanations after all—though not for explanations of the kind offered by physics—the proponents of social relativism contend that such differences have no *economic* reasons but are due to different degrees of *technological* knowledge. Rich societies are rich because of their advanced state of technology; poverty is due to a lack of natural-scientific know-how. Two objections to this view appear obvious: (1) The description of the facts is false. Do not the underdeveloped societies send their future scientists and engineers in large numbers to the universities of the advanced countries, and do not these poor societies then have access to the *same* knowledge upon their return as the rich ones? (2) More important still, technological know-how can only have a material impact if it is utilized. However, in order to do this, there must be savings and investment. It is not the availability of technical or scientific knowledge that imposes limits on a society’s prosperity; rather, it is the amount of savings and investment that imposes limits on the exploitation of actually available knowledge and on scientific progress, insofar as research activities, too, must be supported by saved-up funds. Hence, contrary to relativistic views, economics seems to have something to do with prosperity and poverty after all! [^9]

[^8]: See Mises, *Theory and History*, pp. 44ff.

[^9]: See Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), p. 749.

Nor, it is claimed, does ethics offer support for anything but relativism, for does not the fact of continuous and, so it seems, ineradicable differences of opinion in the field of contemporary politics prove the case of ethical relativism conclusively? Does not social anthropology, the study of societies such as the Fidshi islanders, or the natives of New Guinea, for instance, add still more evidence in support of relativistic conclusions? There are institutions such as cannibalism or slavery which a relativist might be hard pressed to defend. However, according to ethical relativists, regarding these practices as counter-evidence is the result of a misconception. The problem with these institutions is not that they invalidate relativism but that societies adopting them are still under the spell of social rationalism. That is, they still falsely believe in an absolutely founded ethic. Ethical relativism, its proponents claim, rules out intolerant practices such as these and implies a pluralism of values. (But is it not obvious that this doctrine is entirely fallacious? Without an absolute, a priori foundation, a value pluralism is itself just another unfounded ideology, and there is no compelling reason to adopt it over any other one. Only if a priori valid reasons could be given for adopting pluralism could it claim to safeguard tolerance and could cannibalism or slavery then be ruled out as acceptable social practices.[^10])

[^10]: See Henry Veatch, *Rational Man: A Modern Interpretation of Aristotelian Ethics* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1962), esp. pp. 37–46; Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism,” pp. 84–85.
