### The Restoration of Morality: On Liberation

Watin we go do, den? Rothbard no just reconstruct ethics of liberty and con explain d current morass as result of statism; him show us d way we fit take reconstruct morals.

First of all, him don explain d states, as powerful and invincible dem fit be like, ultimately owe dem existence to ideas, since ideas for principle fit change immediately, dem fit bring state down and make dem crumble overnight. 

D representatives of d state dey always and for everywhere dey only be one small minority of dem d population way dem dey rule. D reason for dis dey as simple as e dey fundamental: one hundred parasites fit live comfortable lives if dem dey suck out d life blood of thousands of productive hosts, but thousands of parasites no fit live comfortably out of host population of just one hundred. Yet if dem government agents na just small minority of d population, how dem go fit take enforce dia will for dem dis population and con get away with am? D answer way Rothbard give as well as de la Boetie, Hume, and Mises way dey for am na just by virtue of d voluntary cooperation of d majority of dem d subject population with d state. Yet how d state go fit take secure such cooperation? D answer na becos and sofar say d majority of d population belief for d *legitimacy* of state rule. Dis one no be to talk say d majority of d population must to agree with single state measure. Indeed, e fit well belief say many state policies dry mistaken or even dey worthless. Anyhow, d majority of d population must to belief for for d justice of d institution of d state as such, and hence, dat na even if one particular government go wrong, dem dese mistakes na merely accidents way must dey accepted and tolerated in view of some greater good way dem institution of government go provide. 

Yet how dem go fit take make d majority of d population to belief dis? D answer na with d help of intellectuals. For olden days e mean to try to make alliance between state and church. For modern times and way dey far more effective, dis mean say through d nationalization (socialization) of education: through schools way state-dey-run or schools way state-dey-give-subsidy and universities. D market demand for intellectual service, in particular for areas way concern humanities and social sciences, no dey exactly high and no one dey stable and secure. Intellectuals go dey for d mercy of d values and choices of dem d masses, and generally dem d masses no dey interested for intellectualphilosophical things. D state, for d other hand, note say Rothbard, bin accommodate dia typical egos way dey too much and "dey willing to offer d intellectuals one warm, secure, and permanent berth for him apparatus, secure income, and panoply of prestige". Indeed, dem d modern democratic state in particular, don create one massive supply of intellectuals.

Dis accommodation no dey guarantee "correct"-statist-thinking, of course: and as well and generally as dem dey over pay dem, intellectuals go dey always complain of how little dem dey appreciate dia oh-so-important work by dose way dey power. But e dey certainly help to reach d "correct" conclusions if person realize say without d state-d institution of taxation and legislation-person fit no get work and con gats to try put hand for mechanics of gas pump operation instead of say you concern himself with dat kind problem like alienation, equity, exploration, d deconstruction of gender and sex roles, or d cultures of d Eskimos, dem d Hopis, and d Zulus. Furthermore, even if person dey feel say dem no appreciate am well for dis or say d government way dey power, person still realize say help fit come from another government, and certainly no be from an intellectual assault for d legitimacy of d institution of government as such. Thus, e dey hardly surprising say, as matter of empirical fact, d overwhelming majority of contemporary intellectuals na far-out lefties and say even most conservatives or free market intellectuals such as Friedman or Hayek, for example, dem be fundamentally and philosophically statists.

From this insight into the importance of ideas and the role of intellectuals as bodyguards of the state and statism, it follows that the most decisive role in the process of liberation—the restoration of justice and morality—must fall on the shoulders of what one might call anti-intellectual intellectuals. Yet how can such anti-intellectual intellectuals possibly succeed in delegitimizing the state in public opinion, especially if the overwhelming majority of their colleagues are statists and will do everything in their power to isolate and discredit them as extremists and crackpots? Time permits only a few brief comments on this fundamental question.

First, one must reckon with the vicious opposition from one’s colleagues. In order to withstand it, it is of utmost importance to ground one’s case not in economics and utilitarianism, but in ethics and moral arguments, for only moral convictions provide one with the courage and strength needed in ideological battle. Few are inspired and willing to accept sacrifices if what they are opposed to is mere error and waste. More inspiration and courage can be drawn from knowing that one is engaged in fighting evil and lies. (I’ll return to this shortly.)

Second, it is important to recognize that one does not need to convert one’s colleagues, i.e., to persuade mainstream intellectuals. As Thomas Kuhn has shown, this is rare enough even in the natural sciences. In the social sciences, conversions among established intellectuals from previously held views are almost unheard of. Instead, one should concentrate one’s efforts on the not-yet intellectually committed young, whose idealism makes them also particularly receptive to moral arguments and moral rigorism. Likewise, one should circumvent academia and reach out to the general public (i.e., to the educated laymen), which entertains some generally healthy anti-intellectual prejudices into which one can easily tap.

Third, returning to the importance of a moral attack on the state, it is essential to recognize that there can be no compromise on the level of theory. To be sure, one should not refuse to cooperate with people whose views are ultimately mistaken and confused, *provided* that their objectives can be classified clearly and unambiguously as a step in the right direction of the de-statization of society. For instance, one would not want to refuse cooperation with people who seek to introduce a flat income tax of 10 percent (although one would not want to cooperate with those who would want to combine this measure with an increased sales tax in order to achieve revenue neutrality, for instance). However, under no circumstances should such cooperation lead to or be achieved by compromising one’s own principles. Either taxation is just or it is not. Once it is accepted as just, how is one to oppose any increase in it? The answer is of course that one cannot!

Put differently, compromise on the level of theory, as we find it, for instance, among moderate free-marketeers such as Hayek or Friedman or even among the so-called minarchists, is not only philosophically flawed but is also practically ineffective and indeed counterproductive. Their ideas can be—and in fact are—easily co-opted and incorporated by the state rulers and statist ideology. Indeed, how often do we hear nowadays from statists and in defense of a statist agenda cries such as “even Hayek (Friedman) says”, or, “not even Hayek (Friedman) denies that such and such must be done by the state”! Personally, they may not be happy about this, but there is no denying that their work lends itself to this purpose, and hence, that they actually contributed to the continued and unabated growth of state power.

In other words, theoretical compromise or gradualism will only lead to the perpetuation of the falsehood, evils, and lies of statism, and only theoretical purism, radicalism, and intransigence can and will lead first to gradual practical reform and improvement and then possibly to final victory. Accordingly, as an anti-intellectual intellectual in the Rothbardian sense, one can never be satisfied with criticizing various government follies although one might have to begin with this, but one must always proceed from there to a fundamental attack on the institution of the state as a moral outrage and its representatives as moral as well as economic frauds, liars, and impostors—as emperors without clothes.

Specifically, one must never hesitate to strike at the very heart of the legitimacy of the state: its alleged indispensable role as producer of private protection and security. I have already shown how ridiculous this claim is on theoretical grounds: how can an agency that may expropriate private property possibly claim to be a protector of private property? It is hardly less important to attack the legitimacy of the state in this regard on empirical grounds by pointing out and hammering at the fact that states, which are supposed to protect us, are the very institutions responsible for an estimated 170 million deaths in the twentieth century alone—more than the victims of private crime in all of human history! And this number of victims of private crimes, from which government did not protect us, would have been much lower if governments everywhere and at all times had not undertaken constant efforts to disarm their own citizens so that the governments in turn could become ever more effective killing machines!

Instead of treating politicians with respect, then, one’s criticism of them should be significantly stepped up. Almost to a man they are not only thieves but mass murderers. How dare they demand our respect and loyalty?

But will a sharp and distinct ideological radicalization bring the desired results? I have no doubt. Indeed, only radical and indeed radically simple ideas can possibly stir the emotions of the dull and indolent masses and delegitimize government in their eyes.

Let me quote Hayek to this effect (and in doing so, I hope to indicate also that my rather harsh earlier criticism of him should not be misunderstood as implying that one cannot learn anything from authors who are fundamentally wrong and muddled):

> We must make the building of a free society once more an intellectual adventure, a deed of courage. What we lack is a liberal Utopia, a programme which seems neither a mere defence of things as they are nor a diluted kind of socialism, but a truly liberal radicalism which does not spare the susceptibilities of the mighty... which is not too severely practical and which does not confine itself to what appears today as politically possible. We need intellectual leaders who are prepared to resist the blandishments of power and influence and who are willing to work for an ideal, however small may be the prospects of its early realization. They must be men who are willing to stick to principles and to fight for their full realization, however remote. ...Free trade and freedom of opportunity are ideas which still may arouse the imaginations of large numbers, but a mere “reasonable freedom of trade” or a mere “relaxation of controls” is neither intellectually respectable nor likely to inspire any enthusiasm....
>
> Unless we can make the philosophic foundations of a free society once more a living intellectual issue, and its implementation a task which challenges the ingenuity and imagination of our liveliest minds, the prospects of freedom are indeed dark. But if we can regain that belief in the power of ideas which was the mark of liberalism at its best, the battle is not lost.[^2]

[^2]: Hayek, F.A., “The Intellectuals and Socialism”, in idem, *Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics* (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1969), p. 194.

Hayek did not heed his own advice and provide us with a consistent and inspiring theory. His Utopia, as developed in his *Constitution of Liberty*, is the rather uninspiring vision of the Swedish welfare state. Instead, it is Rothbard who has done what Hayek recognized as necessary for a renewal of classical liberalism; and if there is anything that can reverse the seemingly unstoppable tide of statism and restore justice and liberty, it is the personal example set by Murray Rothbard and the spread of Rothbardianism.
