### From Deposit and Loan Banking to Small Reserve Banking: De Fall of Credit

Banks dey do two different konk task, and na only one we don dey talk since.[^20] One tin dem dey do be say, na wia people dey put dia money, dem dey guard dey clear service for people. Dem dey collect deposit of (commodity) money and dey give identity to money (warehouse receipts; oda type of money) to people wey dey put money dia, dem fit collect am equal and if dem ask for am. All de evidence of money dem give person dem dey hold de same amount of money for dia hand, and person fit collect am back (100 percent reserve banking). Dem no dey put extra money for deposit. But people wey dey deposit dey pay money for de security and clearing service bank dey give dem. For condition for free competition- to de enta bank industry free- de deposit fee, wey makeup de bank gain and how dem take dey get money, em dey be small fee; and de gain- or self, interest dem collect- wey dem gain for bank na de same wit oda one, wey nor concern banking industry.

For de oda hand, em dey very different from oda company dem dey deposit, bank be like middlemen between people wey dey save and wey dey invest- like loan banks. For dis kind function dem dey first offer and enta time-contracts wit people wey dey save. People wey dey save dey loan bank money for short or long time to take exchange for de bank’ wetin dey talk for de contract to repay de money for front wit interest on top. From de way people wey dey save money dey see am, dem dey exchange money for de promise of de future own: de interest form part of dia gain to dey wait. As dem don get de temporary ownership of de savings from people wey dey save, bank go den reloan de same money to people wey dey invest (even demself) take exchange to pay de money back for future wit interest. De difference for de interest- de difference wey dey for de interest for people wey dey save and de ones wey dey borrow- dey show dey price wey dey between doz wey dey save and de ones wey dey invest and em form part of de gain bank dey make from loan. As em concern deposit banking and deposit fee, unda dia competition de amount inbetween dey be small cost, and de gain from loan banking go also be de same as de one dem gain from anoda place.

Nor be deposit banking nor be loan banking as dem put am for here show say if dem increase money supply or income for one side or share de wealth. For every new deposit note dem issue dem dey take equal amount comot for circulation (na only de form of money dey change, nor be em size), and as dem do loan banking de same total money dey change hand dey repeat. All de exchange- wey dey between dos wey deposit and depositing institution as well dos wey dey save, de main bank and dos wey invest- dey both get advantage.

Against, fractional reserve banking wey involve deliberate confusion wey dey de deposit and de loan role. Em show say em dem increase money supply, and em lead to dey share de gain for one side favour bank con join economic slack for form of boom-bust business cycles.

De confusion of both de banking role come to light for de fact say unda fractiotional reserve banking, or dos wey dey deposit dey collect interest (rada dan go pay one fee), and dos wey dey save dey get right to witdraw instantly (rada dan to dey wait wit dia request to reclaim until em reach one certain time for future). Technically, de possibility for bank to dey engage for dos kind practice dey happen base on say dos wey dey hold demand deposits (evidence to money wey dem dey get on demand, quick, and equal) commonly *nor* show dia right de same time. Normally, deposit bank go normally hold de amount of reserve (money main main) for excess of de main daily withdrawal. Em con dey possible for de bank to dey loan dis “too much* reserves to dos wey dey borrow, den dey earn de bank interest back (wey de bank go den partially pass to dos wey dey deposit for from of interest paying deposit accounts).

People wey dey support fractional reserve banking dey always claim say dis practice wey dem dey hold wetin less dan 100 percent reserve show say na ordinary good money “to dey economize,” and dem dey always dey fond to talk say nor be only de bank, but people wey dey deposit (dey receive interest) and dos wey dey save (dey receive instant withdrawal right shaperly) gain from de way dem dey do am. In short, fractional reserve banking dey suffer from two big mistake wey connect and em no bad but get big benefit. First be say, make em dey say anytin wey dey less dan 100 percent reserve banking dey involve wetin persin fit call legal impossibility, but to dey employ em too much reserve to dey grant credit, de bank dey normally transfer temporary ownership of dem to some wey dey borrow, although, dos wey deposit, get right to quick claim, to get back dia ownership ova de same funds. Even so, em dey hard say for some time dos wey dey deposit *and* dos wey dey borrow get special control ova de same resource. Two people *nor fit be* de special owner of one tin and de same tin for de same time. Normally, any bank wey dey do anyhow- to dey reason demand debt wey pass actual resrve- den go see am as fraud. Em contract right *nor fit dey* fulfilled. From de start, dem go reason de bank as wetin dey deeply bankrupt- as em show say em nor fit, against em own assumption, fit hold possible bank run.

Second, to dey lend dia excess reserves to borrowers, de bank dey increase de supply of de money, no matter weda de borrower receive de reserves wey be like normal money or say na like demand deposit (checking accounts). If de loan be like normal money, den de amount of normal money wey dey circulate go increase witout say dem witdraw de same amount of oda type of money from circulation; and if em con be checking account, den de amount of oda type of money go increase witout say den comot de same amount of normal money from circulation.  For any of de case, money go money now pass before, em go con cause de purchase power of money to reduce (inflation) and, for dis tin, to one pattern dem go distribute dia real gain take favour de bank and de people wey dey borrow wey be say na people wey no dey use bank and oda bank customers em go affect. De bank dey collect additional gain for interest and em no dey add anytin for de main wealth of dos wey no use bank (as de case go be if de gain dem get come from wen bank reduce how den dey spend,i.e., savings); and dos wey dey borrow get real, property wey no be money and dia funds, go con make am reduce de main wealth of de oda people wit de same amount.

Moreover, insofar as the bank does not simply spend the excess reserves on its own consumption but instead loans them out against interest charges, invariably a business cycle is set in motion.[^21] The quantity of credit offered is larger than before. As a consequence, the price of credit—the interest charged for loans—will fall below what it otherwise would have been. At a lower price, more credit is taken. Since money cannot breed more money, in order to be able to earn an interest return and a pure profit on top of it, the borrowers will have to convert their borrowed funds into investments. That is, they will have to purchase or rent factors of production—land, labor, and possibly capital goods (produced factors of production)—capable of producing a future output of goods whose value (price) exceeds that of the input. Accordingly with an expanded volume of credit, more presently available resources will be bound up in the production of *future* goods (instead of being used for present consumption) than otherwise would have been; and in order to complete all investment projects now under way, more time will be needed than that required to complete only those that would have been begun without the credit expansion. All the future goods which would have been created without the expansion plus those that are newly added on account of the credit expansion must be produced.

However, in distinct contrast to the situation in which the interest rate falls due to a fall in the rate of time preference (the degree to which present goods are preferred over future goods), and hence where the public has in fact saved more so as to make a larger fund of present goods available to investors in exchange for their promise of a return of future goods, no such change in time preference and savings has taken place in the case under consideration. The public has *not* saved more, and accordingly, the additional amount of credit granted by the bank does not represent *commodity credit* (credit covered by nonmoney goods which the public has abstained from consuming), but it is *fiduciary* or *circulation credit* (credit that has been literally created out of thin air—without any corresponding sacrifice, in the form of nonconsumed nonmoney goods, on the part of the creditor).[^22] Had the additional credit been commodity credit, an expanded volume of investment activities would have been warranted. There would have been a sufficiently large supply of present goods that could be devoted to the production of future goods such that all—the old as well as the newly begun—investment projects could be successfully completed and a higher level of future consumption attained. If the credit expansion is due to the granting of circulation credit, however, the ensuing volume of investment must actually prove overambitious. Misled by a lower interest rate, investors act *as if* savings had increased. They withdraw more of the presently available resources for investment projects, to be converted into future capital goods, than is warranted in light of actual savings. Consequently, capital goods prices will increase initially relative to consumer goods prices, but once the public’s underlying time preference rate begins to reassert itself, a systematic shortage of consumer goods will arise. Accordingly, the interest rate will adjust upward, and it is now consumer goods prices which rise relative to capital goods prices, requiring the liquidation of part of the investment as unsustainable malinvestment. The earlier boom will turn bust, reducing the future standard of living below the level that otherwise could have been reached.

Among recent proponents of fractional reserve banking the cases of Lawrence White and George Selgin[^23] deserve a few critical comments, if for no other reason than that both are critics of Friedmanite monetarism who hark back, instead, to the tradition of Austrian and in particular Misesian monetary theory.[^24] Their monetary ideal is a universal commodity money such as an international gold standard and, based on this, a system of competitive banking which, they claim, would—and should be permitted to do so for reasons of economic efficiency as well as justice—engage in fractional reserve banking and the granting of fiduciary credit.

As to the question of justice, White and Selgin offer but one argument destined to show the allegedly nonfraudulent character of fractional reserves: that outlawing such a practice would involve a violation of the principle of freedom of contract by preventing “banks and their customers from making whatever sorts of contractual arrangements are mutually agreeable”.[^25] Yet this is surely a silly argument. First off, as a matter of historical fact fractional reserve banks never informed their depositors that some or all of their deposits would actually be loaned out and hence could not possibly be ready for redemption at any time. (Even if the bank were to pay interest on deposit accounts, and hence it *should* have been clear that the bank *must* loan out deposits, this does not imply that any of the depositors actually understand this fact. Indeed, it is safe to say that few if any do, even among those who are not economic illiterates.) Nor did fractional reserve banks inform their borrowers that some or all of the credit granted to them had been created out of thin air and was subject to being recalled at any time. How, then, can their practice be called anything but fraud and embezzlement!

Second, and more decisive, to believe that fractional reserve banking should be regarded as falling under and protected by the principle of freedom of contract involves a complete misunderstanding of the very meaning of this principle. Freedom of contract does not imply that *every* mutually advantageous contract should be permitted. Clearly, if A and B contractually agree to rob C, this would not be in accordance with the principle. Freedom of contract means instead that A and B should be allowed to make any contract whatsoever *regarding their own properties*, yet fractional reserve banking involves the making of contracts regarding the property of third parties. Whenever the bank loans its “excess” reserves to a borrower, such a bilateral contract affects the property of third parties in a threefold way. First, by thereby increasing the money supply, the purchasing power of all other money owners is reduced; second, all depositors are harmed because the likelihood of their successfully recovering their own possessions is lowered; and third, all other borrowers—borrowers of commodity credit—are harmed because the injection of fiduciary credit impairs the safety of the entire credit structure and increases the risk of a business failure for every investor of commodity credit.

In order to overcome these objections to the claim that fractional reserve banking accords with the principle of freedom of contract, White and Selgin then, as their last line of defense, withdraw to the position that banks may attach an “option clause” to their notes, informing depositors that the bank may at any time suspend or defer redemption, and letting borrowers know that their loans may be instantly recalled.[^26] While such a practice would indeed dispose of the charge of fraud, it is subject to another fundamental criticism, for such notes would no longer be *money* but a peculiar form of *lottery tickets*.[^27] It is the function of money to serve as the most easily resalable and most widely acceptable good, so as to prepare its owner for instant purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at not yet known future dates; hence, whatever may serve as money so as to be instantly resalable at any future point in time, it must be something that bestows an *absolute* and *unconditional* property right on its owner. In sharp contrast, the owner of a note to which an option clause is attached does *not* possess an unconditional property title. Rather, similar to the holder of a “fractional reserve parking ticket” (where more tickets are sold than there are parking places on hand, and lots are allocated according to a “first-come-firstserved” rule), he is merely entitled to participate in the drawing of certain prizes, consisting of ownership or time-rental services to specified goods according to specified rules. But as drawing rights—and not unconditional ownership titles—they only possess *temporally conditional* value until the time of the drawing, and they become worthless as soon as the prizes have been allocated to the ticket holders; thus, they would be uniquely *un*suited to serve as a medium of exchange.

As regards the second contention: that fractional reserve banking is economically efficient, it is noteworthy to point out that White, although he is undoubtedly familiar with the Austrian-Misesian claim that *any* injection of fiduciary credit must result in a boom-bust cycle, nowhere even mentions the problem of business cycles. Only Selgin addresses the problem. In his attempt to show that fractional reserve banking does not cause business cycles, however, Selgin then falls headlong into the fundamental Keynesian error of confusing the demand for money (determined by the utility of money) and savings (determined by time preference).[^28]

According to Selgin, “to hold inside money is to engage in voluntary saving”; and accordingly “an increase in the demand for money warrants an increase in bank loans and investments” because

> [w]henever a bank expands its liabilities in the process of making new loans and investments, it is the holders of the liabilities who are the ultimate lenders of credit, and what they lend are the real resources they could acquire if, instead of holding money, they spent it.[^29]

Based on this view of the holding of money as representing saving and an increased demand for money as being the same thing as increased saving, then, Selgin goes on to criticize Mises’s claim that *any* issuance of fiduciary media, in lowering the interest rate below its “natural” level, must cause a business cycle as “confused”. “No ill consequences result from the issue of fiduciary media in response to a greater demand for balances of inside money”.[^30]

Yet the confusion is all Selgin’s. First off, it is false to say that the holding of money (the act of not spending it), is equivalent to saving. One might as well say—and this would be equally wrong—that the not-spending of money is equivalent to *not* saving. In fact, saving is not-consuming, and the demand for money has nothing to do with saving or not-saving. The demand for money is the unwillingness to buy or rent nonmoney goods, and these include consumer goods (present goods) *and* capital goods (future goods). Not-spending money is to purchase, *neither* consumer goods *nor* investment goods. Contrary to Selgin, then, matters are as follows: Individuals may employ their monetary assets in one of three ways. They can spend them on consumer goods; they can spend them on investment; or they can keep them in the form of cash. There are no other alternatives. While a person must at all times make decisions regarding three margins at once, invariably the outcome is determined by two distinct and praxeologically unrelated factors. The consumption/investment proportion (the decision of how much of one’s money to spend on consumption and how much on investment) is determined by a person’s time preference (the degree to which he prefers present consumption over future consumption). On the other hand, the source of his demand for cash is the utility attached to money (the personal satisfaction derived from money in allowing him immediate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates).

Accordingly, if the demand for money increases while the social stock of money is given, this additional demand can only be satisfied by bidding down the money prices of nonmoney goods. The purchasing power of money will increase, the *real* value of individual cash balances will be raised, and at a higher purchasing power per unit money, the demand for and the supply of money will once again be equilibrated. The relative price of money versus nonmoney will have changed. But unless time preference is assumed to have changed at the same time, *real* consumption and *real* investment will remain the same as before: the additional money demand is satisfied by reducing nominal consumption *and* investment spending in accordance with the same pre-existing consumption/investment proportion, driving the money prices of both consumer as well as producer goods down and leaving real consumption and investment at precisely their old levels. If time preference is assumed to change concomitantly with an increased demand for money, however, then everything is possible. Indeed, if spending were reduced exclusively on investment goods, an increased demand for money could even go hand in hand with an increase in the rate of interest and reduced saving and investment. However, this, or the equally possible opposite outcome, would not be due to a change in the demand for money but exclusively to a change (a rise, or a fall) in the time preference schedule. In any case, if the banking system were to follow Selgin’s advice and accommodate an increased demand for cash by issuing fiduciary credit, the social rate of time preference would be falsified, excessive investment would result, and a boom-bust cycle would be set in motion, rendering the practice of fractional reserve banking fraudulent *as well as* economically inefficient.

White’s and Selgin’s proposal of a commodity money based system of competitive fractional reserve banking—of partial fiat money—is neither just (and hence the term “free banking” is inappropriate), nor does it produce economic stability. It is no fundamental improvement as compared to the monetarist reality of monopolistically issued pure fiat currencies. Indeed, in one respect Friedman’s pure fiat money proposal contains a more realistic and correct analysis than White’s and Selgin’s because Friedman recognizes “what used to be called ‘the inherent instability’ of fractional reserve banking”, and he understands that this inherent instability of competitive fractional reserve banking will sooner or later collapse in a “liquidity crisis” and then lead to his favored regime—a governmentally provided pure fiat currency—anyway.[^31]

Only a system of universal commodity money (gold), competitive banks, *and* 100-percent-reserve deposit banking with a strict functional separation of loan and deposit banking constitutes a just monetary system that can assure economic stability and present a genuine answer to the current monetarist fiasco.

[^20]: On the following see in particular Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Synder, 1983); idem, *The Case for a 100 Percent Gold Dollar* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1991); Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*; idem, *Human Action*; also Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective”, in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); S. Koch, *Fractional Reserve Banking: A Practical Critique* (Master’s thesis, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 1992).

[^21]: On the theory of the business cycle see in particular Ludwig von Mises, *Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik* (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928); idem, *Human Action*, chap. 20; F.A. Hayek, *Prices and Production* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1931); Murray N. Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975).

[^22]: On the fundamental distinction between commodity credit and circulation credit, see Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 263ff.

[^23]: See Lawrence White, *Competition and Currency* (New York: New York University Press, 1989); George Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking* (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988).

[^24]: For a critique of White and Selgin as misinterpreting the fundamental thrust of Mises’s theory of money and banking see Joseph Salerno, “The Concept of Coordination in Austrian Macroeconomics”, in *Austrian Economics: Perspectives on the Past and Prospects for the Future*, Richard Ebeling, ed. (Hillsdale, Mich.: Hillsdale College Press, 1991); idem, “Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized”, *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 (1993): 113–46.

[^25]: White, *Competition and Currency*, p. 156, also pp. 55–56; George Selgin, “Short-Changed in Chile: The Truth about the Free-Banking Episode”, *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter/Spring, 1990): 5.

[^26]: White, *Currency and Competition*, p. 157; Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 137.

[^27]: See Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective”, p. 30.

[^28]: For a critique of this error see Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 39–43; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Theory of Employment, Money Interest, and the Capitalist Process: The Misesian Case Against Keynes”, in *The Economics and Ethics of Private Property*, Hoppe, ed. (Boston: Kluwer, 1993), pp. 119–20, 137–38.

[^29]: Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 55.

[^30]: Ibid., pp. 61–62.

[^31]: See Friedman and Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?”
