De answer go depend on whether or not de demonstrated preference for fractional reserve banking services, dat is, de issue and acceptance of fiduciary media, whether e involve only and just de property of de two contracting parties.  At any given point in time, de quantity of property (appropriated goods)—whether na consumer goods, producer goods, or money—de given. Fractional reserve banking nor dey increase de quantity of existing property (money or otherwise), even no even dey transfer existing property from one party to anoda. Rather, e involve de production and sale of an increased quantity of titles to an unchanged stock of money property (gold); dat is, de supply of and de demand for counterfeit money and illegitimate appropriation. As e be for every other case of counterfeiting (forgery)—of stock and commodity certificates, banknotes, land titles, original art, etc.—de issue and sale of money copies (banknotes) wey dey uncovered by originals (gold) go physically diminish or despoil de original money—stock, commodity, land, or de art—owners dem property. But person wey dey counterfeit money dey particularly dangerous and dey invasive because of the character wey define money as nai be de most salable and widely accepted of offers all goods; dat is, because *money* - counterfeit dey open door for dia sellers make dem appropriate de widest possible range of objects for undue appropriation (from money to almost every oda form of real property). 

As e be so, e nor dey surprising say of all forms of forgery, the counterfeiting of money don always get de greatest attraction. As long as money dey exists dere go must be persistent demand for counterfeit money. Nor dey reason dis attraction and demand, howeva, nothing dey wrong with a blanket prohibition against fractional reserve banking. No one go operate a fractional reserve bank for the same reason that no one, in any oda line of business, fit engage for counterfeiting, dat is, na the production and sale of titles or copies to non-existing property or originals. For court of law, e go dey sufficient say single money or other property owner bring suit against a fractional reserve bank as a manufacturer of counterfeit money, and the bank immediately go need to cease its current operation and come dey reduced to e two original functions: deposits and loans. Bank wey dey yield interest (instead of to dey charge fee) name contradiction of terms:na counterfeiting money warehouse e be, and gats dey outlawed, no matter de benefit wey suppose go to bank depositors, borrowers, and owners. To do like dis nor be restriction of freedom of contracts for de market for banking services, but na de requirement of lawful money and banking. Everybody wey dey put money for interest-yielding deposit accounts dey engage for undue and unlawful appropriation.[^24]

De relationship wey dey between states and fractional reserve banks dey even more intimate, and in any case dey uite different from de one wey  Selgin and White bin suggest. Dem claim say e go be illegitimate interference with the operation of free markets if the state come decide to prohibit fractional reserve banking. In fact, fractional reserve banking na de result of illegitimate state interference wit de market, and to prohibit am go only repair e earlier intervention. Selgin and White recognize say for de evolution of a free banking system, 100-percent-reserve-deposit banking and, functionally separated, loan banking, gats (praxeologically) precede fractional reserve banking. For  their view, fractional reserve banking na d natural outgrowth of  100-percent-reserve system wey bin dey before. Howeva, dem nor dey offer any explanation for dis transition as natural solution to a problem wey nor go fit dey solved under de prior system of 100-percent banking (in de way wey Austrians conceive of money as de natural solution to de problem of lacking coincidences of wants under preceding barter system). Dem merely affirm say de transition actually occurred.

While person fit easily see why and how a banker go wan take advantage of de possibilities of counterfeiting, e just clear say any such attempt nor go pass without say e nor d eyquickly and continually being challenged. Surely de current writers and thousands of earlier legal and economic theorists for don accuse fractional reserve banks of counterfeiting and for don bring suit against dem. De further course of banking evolution go den depend on court decision. If de court decide say de issue of fiduciary media *qua* titles to money uncovered by money cdon amount to counterfeiting, fractional reserve banks nor go come into existence; and na only ife decide odawise nai dem go fit actually appear at all. Nothing for dis evolution dey natural; everytin dey appear rada deliberate. De outcome of dat kind trialsnor go dey naturally be Selgin and White’s liking. Instead, if person go assume say fractional reserve bankers go dey tried on counterfeiting charges before a jury of diar own peers (of oda businessmen), we dare to talk say, empirically, de overwhelming number for dose kind cases go end for conviction (despite de testimony of Selgin and White). Why, e come be,de almost complete dominance of fractional reserve banking?

De answer be say de courts wey dey decide dese mattas everywhere na state courts. Na only if a single court possess territorial monopoly of jurisdiction nai e go dey possible say de dispute at hand fit dey settled once and for all. And dat e din dey uniformly settled for de way e go, dat is, by permitting rada dan prohibiting fractional reserve banking, dey follow from de interest of every court and judge *qua* state court and state judge. De owners and agents for de state dey recognize fully as much as bankers de potentials wey money counterfeiting get as source of income. As dem dey permit bankers to issue fiduciary media (rada dan prohibiting de practice as counterfeiting), banks don dey made existentially dependent for de state. They fit only operate because de state, due to e territorial monopoly of jurisdiction, dey protect dem from counterfeiting suits; and de state dey do dis one only under de provision say banks go share with am for de extra revenue and credit wey dem dey derive from legalized counterfeiting. So, by permitting fractional reserve free banking destate don actually create de first and preliminary form of  joint-bank-state-counterfeiting cartel wey dey under e own ultimate control.

Once fractional reserve banking don receive blanket protection from de state, e follow naturally say fractional reserve banks go outcompete 100 percent reserve banks. Nor be de way Selgin and White[^25] assert, bcos dem dey  beta  or more efficient banks, but for say, once money counterfeiting dey permitted, banks wey dey  engage in am go wan outcompete banks wey no get permit. Dat is, for de same reason say, once industrial air pollution dey permitted a polluting steel producer go wan outcompete a steel producerwey nor dey pollute, and for de same reason wey protection agency with taxing powers, a state, go wan outcompete protectors wey no get taxing power. To put am differently, nor be for every case nai good dey drive out bad. Na dis be de case only so long as private property rights dey inviolate. If dem nor dey, and privileged agents or agencies dey, dose wey dey exempted from de universal rules regarding de appropriation, production and transfer of property, den dese go wan outcompete oda normal agents. For dis case, bad drives out good. As e be so, na complete mistake to interpret de empirical success of fractional reserve banking as proof of e greater economic efficiency. De success of fractional over 100 percent deposit banking nor be market phenomenon as  de success of tax-yielding protectors, states, over competitive and nontaxing security producers. E dey false to suggest, as Selgin and White don do, say fractional reserve banking don stand de market test and represents de outcome of voluntary consumer choices. After all, 100-percent-reserve-deposit banking nor dey outlawed and consumers dey free to bank wit dem instead of fractional banks if na dat one dem prefer. Or dem go still argue say de polluting steel producer don stood de test of de market because, after all, consumers dey free to buy dia  steel from nonpolluting steel producers, or say states don prove demselves for de market bcos, after all, consumers dey free to buy dia  security also from agencies without any tax and jurisdictional powers?[^26]

Moreova, whereas 100-percent-reserve banking dey crisis-proof, fractional reserve banking, as even Selgin and White don agree, nor dey like dat, in fact, as we can fit only briefly indicate here. A system of free fractional reserve banking go, in accordance wit Mises’s theory of interventionism, lead to further state interventions and de successive devolution of money. Free fractional reserve banking *qua* state-protected competition in counterfeiting go lead to  steady contest among banks for testing de viability of increasingly lower reserve ratios. Dis dey bound to lead to banking crises, and  governments go use am for de introduction of central banking. Central banking go lead to still more counterfeiting, and to de abolition of commodity money and adoption of national fiat currencies. Lastly, international—inter-central bank—competition for fiat money counterfeiting go lead to state bankruptcies, and dia  financial default go dey used by de most powerful among de surviving states for de establishment of one-world government, central bank, and fiat currency.

As e be so, de solution wey Selgin and White don propose to de current monetary disorder, dat is, a gold-based free—fractional reserve—banking system, na in fact de initial interventionist cause of virtually all contemporary monetary problems.[^27]

[^24]: Rothbard come explain:

::::> De champions of free competition in counterfeiting don reply say dis na simply de market at work, dat de market registers a “demand” for more expanded credit, and dat de private bankers, dose Kirznerian entrepreneurs, dey simply “alert” to such market demands. Well, of course, dere  always dey “demand” for fraud, and embezzlement, on de market, and dere go always get plenty of “alert” swindlers who dey eager and willing to furnish a supply of dis items. But if we wan define de “market” as e nor be simply supply of desired goods and services, but as supply of such goods *within a* framework of inviolate property rights, then we see a very different picture. (“The Present State of Austrian Economics,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* 6, no. 2, [1995]: 77)

[^25]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 97–98.

[^26]: A similar confusion characterizes Selgin and White’s view on the relationship between money proper (gold) and banknotes. They criticize Hoppe for claiming that, in a genuine free-market order, most people would use money proper rather than banknotes (without mentioning Hoppe’s theoretical reason). “The facts,” they claim, “are otherwise” (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 99). Yet these facts—the historical success of the banknote over genuine money—are *the result of an earlier state interference* with private-property rights (the legalization of fractional reserve banking). As Ludwig von Mises noted,

::::> [t]he truth is that, except for small groups of businessmen who were able to distinguish between good and bad banks, bank notes were always looked upon with distrust. It was the special charters which governments granted to privileged banks that slowly made these suspicions disappear. (p. 438)
::::> 
::::> In [governments’] eyes the foremost task of the banks was to lend money to the treasury. The money-substitutes were favorably considered as pace-makers for government-issued paper money. The convertible banknote was merely a first step on the way to the nonredeemable banknote. With the progress of statolatry and the policy of interventionism these ideas have become general and are no longer questioned by anybody. (p. 442)
::::> 
::::> Governments did not foster the use of bank notes in order to avoid inconvenience to ladies shopping. Their idea was to lower the rate of interest and to open a source of cheap credit to their treasuries. In their eyes the increase in the quantity of fiduciary media was a means of promoting welfare. Banknotes are not indispensable. All the economic achievements of capitalism would have been accomplished if they had never existed. (*Human Action: A Treatise on Economics*, 3rd rev. ed. [Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1966], p. 447)

::::Accordingly, Mises’s view regarding sound money is completely different from Selgin and White’s. Whereas the latter believe that gold would—and should—ultimately disappear from circulation altogether (see note 3 above), Mises considered it a requirement of a sound monetary system that

::::> [g]old must be in the cash holdings of everybody. Everybody must see gold coins changing hands, must be used to having gold coins in his pockets, to receiving gold coins when he cashes his pay check, and to spending gold coins when he buys in a store. (*The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 450–51)

[^27]: On the relationship between state money and banking and political centralization see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Banking, Nation States, and International Politics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 4 (1990): 55–87; and Jörg Guido Hülsmann, “Banking and Political Centralization,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 13, no. 1 (1997). Selgin and White argue:

::::> We also reject the notion … that *competitive* banks issuing redeemable liabilities can create credit “out of thin air.” By the nature of the balance sheet, all bank loans must be funded by liabilities or equity. Neither source of funds can be conjured out of thin air. No one is forced to hold a competitive bank’s redeemable liabilities or to buy its shares; anyone can hold claims on other banks instead, or on no bank. A competitive bank must therefore *expend real resources to attract a clientele* by the provision of interest and services. The notion that a bank can extend credit … gratuitously is valid only with respect to the inframarginal credits of a monopoly bank, or to [the] issuer of a forced tender; it does not apply to a bank in a competitive system. (p. 94, n. 13)
::::> 
::::> Thus competition will beat down the returns to capital invested in fractional-reserve banking until the marginal bank is earning only the normal rate of return. (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 97)

::::While we have no difficulty accepting the distinction drawn here between competitive and monopolistic banking, none of this has any bearing on the issue at hand, that is, the validity of the analogy between states and fractional reserve banks as outlaw organizations. For one, states have to compete for clients (residents). Indeed, competition between states (or banks) for clients only comes to a complete halt with the establishment of a single world state (or central bank). And the intra-state competition between fractional reserve banks is, as explained, competition within a state-privileged industry; that is, monopolistic competition (just as inter-state competition is an example of monopolistic competition). Second and more importantly, the difference between competitive and monopolistic banks (or states), interesting as it may otherwise be, does not affect in the slightest their common characteristic as fractional reserve banks (or states). Counterfeiting and taxation do not change their nature because they are undertaken competitively.

::::The error can be revealed by analogy. Selgin and White are paraphrased here: We also reject the notion that competitive states issuing tax liabilities can create taxes out of thin air. By the nature of state budgets all expenditures must be funded by conquest, robbery, or theft. Neither source of funds can be conjured out of thin air. No one is forced to hold any particular state’s tax liabilities or buy its shares; anyone can move and pay taxes to another state, or to no state. A competitive state must therefore *expend real resources* to attract a clientele by the provision of protection and services. The notion that a state can increase taxes gratuitously is valid only with respect to the inframarginal taxes of a monopoly state; it does not apply to a state in a competitive system. Thus, competition will beat down the returns to capital invested in states until the marginal state is earning only the normal rate of return.

::::According to Selgin and White, it would seem to follow that taxation (like money counterfeiting) is not to be considered a problem until the arrival of a single world monopoly bank. Up until then, under competitive conditions, taxes represent nothing but a normal market income.
