### De Positive Economics of Fiduciary Media: Money Balance, Price, Adjustment, Saving, and Investment

From de way de nature of fiduciary media be- as title to money property (gold) wey nor dey exist, title wey dem give money wey oda things wey no be money don cover, or plain fake money- e go be like say fractional reserve banking nor dey affect am as na continuous wealth and income dey reshuffle. As substitute for de money wey dem recover  dey come from the issuing bank and de customers wey be borrowers outside of the economy, and e go come raise de price even more of de goods, real money (property) go dey transferred and redistributed wey go favor de bank wey dey issue and de first receivers of money dem and sellers . Rothbard explain say,

> De people wey receive the money first na im go gain de most, de next go gain small put, etc., sotey de middle go come reach, and from dere every person wey dey receive go dey lose more and more as e dey wait for new money. For de person wey come first selling price go run up while buying price go remain almost where e stand put; but later, buying prices go don rise while selling price nor go don change.[^28]

According to wetin Selgin and White don talk, sha, fiduciary media fit achieve far more. Instead of to dey only redistribute property wey dey, de matter wey concern fiduciary media fit , under some kind level, e fit lead to increase for real money (property). We don already quote them wehen they talk say “benefits wey bank borrowers go get who dey enjoy steady supply of intermediate credit, and for everybody wey dey work with the bigger stock of capital equipment wey dey de economy as time dey go.” Dem dodge to put am like dis make e dey clear,yet wetin dem dey claim na say, under specific parol, increase for title for fund wey never change for goods go make the fund grow or go stop am to reduce.

Wen and how dat kind miracle wan take happen? According to wetin Selgin and White talk, (unexpected) change for the demand for money go lead to “temporary” or “short-run monetary disequilibrum” wey go involve “serious misallocation of resources”- dat na, *unless* dat kind change fall put for fractional reserve banking practices. Dem yarn say:

> For de long run, nominal price go take dressing to equal supply and demand for money to balance, no matter de amount of nominal money wey dey. E nor follow, sha, say each and every *change* for de supply or demand for money go lead *sharparly* to new long-run equilibrium, because the price adjustment wey we dey expect go take time. Dem dey take time because nor be all agents dey aware instantly and perfectly for change wey don happen for de money wey dey stock or money demand, and because e go cost to increase some price and therefore “sticky”. E follow say, for the short time (by observation,reason “for some months”), less dan the change wey we dey expect for the supply of or demand for money fit lead to monetary disequilibrum….Na for dat reason e come become attractive feature for free banking wey get fractional reserves wey the nominal amount of bank-issued money dey be like e wan adjust so as to clear changes for the movement of money.[^29]
> 
> If de banking system come fail to increase the amount of money wey dem issue and the price level no con drop sharparly, na excess demand for money go happen (assuming say amount of base money too no increase sharp sharp). E go make excess supply of goods rise : consumer goods wey dem neva sell go pile up for sellers dem shelves (this of course go put downward pressure for price until last last goods proce go don fall enough). Business go dey low key until de power of money to buy con rise back to where e bin dey.[^30]

From de beginning, person gats wonder about the fact say d problem about monetary disequilibrum dey(not to talk of the solution). For the quote wey ah just throw, person fit put any goods in place of money: televisions, steel, beer, or pretzels. The amount of goods like this ones dey fixed one kind (so also the quantity of gold), and yet (unexepected) change for the demand for televisions, steel, beer, or pretzels no dey lead to temporary disequilibria wey involve serious misdividing of resources. Or, for any way, dey no dey cause gbenge wey go require make dem bring special new device ( like fractional television or beer production).

E no even still clear why we suppose believe say “e dey important to dey divide between short-run and long-run effect of changes for the demand schedule for money or wey dey the stock of money.”[^31] or, for any matter, why e be say the difference suppose dey of different importance or value in the case wey involve money from one wey concern any other thing. To dey sure, e dey take time before increase wey no dey expected for increase for the demand for television and beer, for example, go don finish all e effect for the system for relative process and one new adjustment production structure go don dey established. But this no mean say price adjustment dey take time (wey go dey cause short-run gbenge). But opposite, price adjustment go happen immediately and no go waste time. This fact don dey overlooked because of un-Austrian concern for macroeconomic artifacts like de general price level, long-run equilibrium, and the wey money dey waka. Sha, when we look am from correct individualist angle, doubt no go dey regarding the fact say proce adjustment dey happen instant plus to consider the human involvement of de short and the long run.

For individualistic term, increase for de demand for money na de result of the action of individuals wey don do on purpose; that is, people mind for increasing their own cash balance. To do am, person gats reduce the buying wey im dey do and/or increase e sales. For either side, de result na immediate fall for some of the prices.  As e be say person don reduce e buy buy of x,y,z, de money price of x,y,z go come reduce instant (compared to wetin for happen for the other case), and same way, if person reduce e  sales of a, b, or c, their price go fall instant. Nobody dey worry about the general proce level or de generalized ability of money to fit buy. Instead, everybody dey reason the specific prices and the power wey money get regarding some special items (and everybody dey interested on e own and different special range wey price get and e power to buy). In restricting his specific purchases and/or increasing his specific sales, each actor accomplishes exactly and immediately what he wants: certain prices that he deems too high are lowered, the purchasing power of a unit of money increases, the real value of his cash balance rises, and his demand for and supply of money is immediately brought back into equilibrium (and he wishes to hold neither more nor less money than he actually does).[^32]

The adjustment of the praxeologically meaningless general price level necessitated by an increased demand for money is nothing but the summation of a series of countless immediate and purposeful individual cash-balance adjustments. If the increased demand for money is accommodated by the issue of fiduciary media, as Selgin and White advocate this adjustment process will not be facilitated but delayed.[^33] The speed of the adjustment of prices depends on the market-participants’ expectations concerning the given quantity of money. If it is reasonable to assume that fractional reserve banks will increase their fiduciary issues in response to an unanticipated increase in the demand for money, then the adjustment will take *more* time. Production would adjust and begin *earlier* without the additional influence of inflation.[^34]

Moreover, the proposed solution to the alleged problem of short-run monetary disequilibrium displays a fundamental confusion regarding the concept of demand (and supply), and the relationship between the demand for money, saving, and investment in particular. First, an increased demand for money (as for televisions, beer, or pretzels) is not just a wish to have more money (or televisions, beer, etc.), but *effective* demand. That is, an increased demand for money (as for anything else) can be satisfied only if the demander is willing to increase his market-supply of and/or reduce his demand for something else. Likewise, the supplier (seller) of money can only increase his supply of money if he reduces simultaneously the supply of (or his reservation demand for) something else. The authors have overlooked Say’s law: all goods (property) are bought with other goods, no one can demand anything without supplying something else, and no one can demand or supply more of anything unless he demands or supplies less of something else. But this is here *not* the case whenever a fiduciary note is supplied and demanded. The increased demand for money is satisfied without the demander demanding, and without the supplier supplying, less of anything else. Through the issue and sale of fiduciary media, wishes are accommodated, not effective demand. Property is appropriated (effectively demanded) without supplying other property in exchange. Hence, this is not a market exchange—which is governed by Say’s law—but an act of undue appropriation. Or would it be an efficient solution to the problem of unanticipated short-run television, beer, or pretzel-shortages if television, beer, and pretzel producers were to accommodate such increased demand “temporarily” by issuing and selling additional titles to televisions, beer, and pretzels but not these goods themselves?

Second, Selgin and White further misconstrue the nature of money and demand for money held in making the extraordinary claim that the issue of fiduciary media “*matched by an increased demand to hold fiduciary media*” is not only not disequilibrating, but will actually afford the economy a “larger stock of capital equipment,” because

> [t]he act of holding fractional-reserve *bank-issued* money not only (like holding base money) defers consumption for a longer or shorter period, but also *temporarily lends funds* to the bank of issue in doing so. The period of the loan is unspecified … but if the bank can estimate with a fair degree of accuracy the lengths of time for which its demand claims will remain in circulation … it can safely make investments of corresponding length.[^35]

Following the lead of Rothbard, Hoppe criticized this essentially Keynesian view concerning the relationship between the demand for money and savings (loanable funds)[^36] by pointing out that

> [n]ot-spending money is to purchase *neither* consumer goods *nor* investment goods…. Individuals may employ their monetary assets in one of three ways. They can spend them on consumer goods; they can spend them on investment; or they can keep them in the form of cash. There are no other alternatives…. The consumption/investment proportion, i.e., the decision of how much … to spend on consumption and how much on investment, is determined by a person’s time preference; i.e., the degree to which he prefers present consumption over future consumption. On the other hand, the source of his demand for cash is the utility attached to money; i.e., the personal satisfaction derived from money in allowing him immediate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates.
> 
> Accordingly, if the demand for money increases while the social stock of money is given, this additional demand can only be satisfied by bidding down the money prices of non money goods. The purchasing power of money will increase, the *real* value of individual cash balances will be raised, and at a higher purchasing power per unit money, the demand for and the supply of money will once again be equilibrated. The relative price of money versus non-money will have changed. But *unless* time preference is assumed to have changed at the same time, *real* consumption and *real* investment will remain the same as before: the additional money demand is satisfied by reducing nominal consumption *and* investment spending in accordance with the same pre-existing consumption/investment proportion, driving the money prices of both consumer as well as producer goods down and leaving real consumption and investment at precisely their old levels.[^37]

Accordingly, Hoppe concluded, it is *never* warranted to accommodate an increased demand for money by issuing fiduciary credit.[^38] In fact, to do so will either—insofar as the accommodating increase of fiduciary media is unanticipated and the market rate of interest falls temporarily below the natural rate of interest—lead to a boom-bust cycle; or else—insofar as the monetary change arising from the banking system is anticipated and the market rate of interest is bid up (in the expectation of higher selling prices) in accordance with the height of the natural rate—it will accomplish no more than a plain wealth and income redistribution among various members of society. It is praxeologically impossible, however, that the issue of fiduciary media can lead to an “enlarged stock of capital equipment.”

[^28]: Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993), p. 851.

[^29]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 100–01.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 105\. As Roger Garrison, another fractional reserve free banker, has put it, “in terms of the equation of exchange [MV=PQ], we can say that free banking adjusts M so as to offset changes in V; but allows changes in Q to be accommodated by changes in P.” Garrison describes the short-run “monetary disequilibrium” in almost identical form:

> An increase in the demand for money puts downward pressure on product and factor prices in general. If there were no money-supply response, a general decline in economic activity would follow, since prices and wages could not fully and instantaneously adjust themselves to the new market conditions. Goods in general would go unsold; production would be cut; workers would be laid off…. With a less-than-perfectly flexible price system, general deflationary pressures can push the economy below its potential during the period in which prices are adjusting to the higher monetary demand. And the fact that some prices and some wages are more flexible than others means that the adjustment period will involve changes in relative prices that reflect no changes in relative scarcities. These are precisely the kinds of problems … avoided by free banking’s responsiveness to increases in money demand. (“Central Banking, Free Banking, and Financial Crises,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 9, no. 2 [1996]: 117)

[^31]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 100.

[^32]: Thus writes Mises:

> Buyers and sellers on the market never concern themselves with the elements in the equation of exchange, of which two—velocity of circulation and the price level—do not even exist before market parties act and the other two—the quantity of money (in the whole economy) and the sum of transactions—could not possibly be known to the parties in the market. Only the importance which the various actors in the market attach, on the one hand, to the maintenance of a cash balance of a certain magnitude and, on the other hand, to the ownership of the various goods in question determines the formation of the exchange relationship between money and goods. (“The Position of Money Among Economic Goods,” in *Money, Method, and the Market Process*, Richard Ebeling, ed. [Boston: Kluwer, 1990], p. 61)

[^33]: Moreover, from an individualist perspective, the increased demand for money occurs with specific actors at specific times and places. It is not sufficient for banks to accommodate some abstract higher money demand by more money; rather, but the accommodation would have to occur precisely with the correct people and locations. If this is not the case, one can hardly speak of an accommodation but of an additional distortion. This difficulty was recognized by the early Hayek:

> in order to eliminate all monetary influences on the formation of prices, and the structure of production, it would not be sufficient merely quantitatively to adapt the supply of money to these changes in demand, it would be necessary also to see that it came into the hands of those who actually require it; that is, to that part of the system where that change in business organization or the habits of payment had taken place. (*Prices and Production* [London: Routledge, 1935], p. 124)

With the later Hayek, one wonders how banks could possibly have the requisite knowledge of performing this task.

[^34]: As regards the stickiness of prices, and the redistributive consequences of an increased demand for money vis-à-vis an array of prices of varying degrees of stickiness, which Selgin and White as well as Garrison raise as matters of concern, it is of utmost importance to recognize that prices are the outcome of purposive action—and so is their stickiness. That is, the flexibility or inflexibility of various product and service prices is not accidental to, but a deliberate part of, these products and services. Contrary to Garrison’s claim, the stickiness of prices does affect and is related to, real relative scarcities. If more sticky prices suffer more, so to speak, so be it; that will teach them to be less sticky in the future—if the owners of the property in question act in a manner compatible with this end.

[^35]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 103\. The error of confusing property and titles lies also at the bottom of Selgin and White’s attempts to separate analytically the demand for outside money from the demand for inside money, as if these were somehow two different kinds of money with two different and independent demands.

[^36]: Selgin stated the same thesis thus:

> Whenever a bank expands its liabilities in the process of making new loans and investments, it is the holders of the liabilities who are the ultimate lenders of credit, and what they lend are the real resources they could acquire if, instead of holding money, they spent it. When the expansion or contraction of bank liabilities proceeds in such a way as to be at all times in agreement with changing demands for inside money, the quantity of real capital funds supplied to borrowers by the banks is equal to the quantity voluntarily offered to the banks by the public. Under these conditions, banks are simply intermediaries of loanable funds. (*The Theory of Free Banking: Money Supply under Competitive Note Issue*, p. 55)

As for John Maynard Keynes (*The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money* [New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1936], p. 82), he had written that the notion that the creation of credit by banking systems allows investment to take place to which “no genuine saving” corresponds; that is, “the idea that saving and investment … can differ from one another, is to be explained, I think, by an optical illusion” (p. 81).

> [T]he savings which result from this decision are just as genuine as any other savings. No one can be compelled to own the additional money corresponding to the new bank-credit, unless he deliberately prefers to hold more money rather than some other form of wealth. (p. 83)

Indeed, Selgin acknowledges that

> many Keynesians might accept the prescription for monetary equilibrium offered [by him]. Those who do not regard the liquidity trap as an important factual possibility would probably accept it as entirely adequate. (*The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 59)

Henry Hazlitt remarked on this Keynesian idea that

> [o]n the same reasoning we can create any amount of new “savings” we wish overnight, simply by printing that amount of new paper money, because *somebody* will necessarily hold that new paper money! (*The Failure of the “New Economics”: An Analysis of the Keynesian Fallacies* [Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 1983], p. 227)

[^37]: Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?,” pp. 72–73.

[^38]: See also Hoppe, “The Theory of Employment, Money, Interest, and the Capitalist Process: The Misesian Case against Keynes,” in *The Economics and Ethics of Private Property* (Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer, 1993), and Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993), pp. 167ff., 667ff.; idem, *America’s Great Depression* (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983), pp. 39ff.

As for Selgin and White’s claim of being Misesians, it is worthwhile to quote Mises on

> the role cash holding plays in the process of saving and capital accumulation…. [i]f an individual employs a sum of money not for consumption but for the purchase of factors of production, saving is directly turned into capital accumulation. If the individual saver employs his additional savings for increasing his cash holding because this is in his eyes the most advantageous mode of using them, he brings about a tendency toward a fall in commodity prices and a rise in the monetary unit’s purchasing power. If we assume that the supply of money in the market system does not change, this conduct on the part of the saver will not directly influence the accumulation of capital and its employment for an expansion of production. The effect of our saver’s saving, i.e., the surplus of goods produced over goods consumed, does not disappear on account of his hoarding. The prices of capital goods do not rise to the height they would have attained in the absence of such hoarding. But the fact that more capital goods are available is not affected by the striving of a number of people to increase their cash holdings. If nobody employs the goods—the nonconsumption of which brought about the additional saving—for an expansion of his consumptive spending, they remain as an increment in the amount of capital goods available, whatever their prices may be. The two processes—increased cash holding of some people and increased capital accumulation—take place side by side. A drop in commodity prices, other things being equal, causes a drop in the money equivalent of the various individuals’ capital. But this is not tantamount to a reduction in the supply of capital goods and does not require an adjustment of production activities to an alleged impoverishment. It merely alters the money items to be applied in monetary calculation. (Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 521–22)
