## #

There can be no doubt, then, that taxes invariably reduce production and with this the consumer’s standard of living. Whichever way things are put, there is no escaping the conclusion that taxation is a means of obstructing the formation of wealth and thereby creating relative impoverishment.
No doubt at all, say, taxes dey invariably reduce production and for dis de consumer’s standard of living. Wicheva ways dem put things, dem nor fit escape de conclusion say taxation na way wey dem take dey block de formation of wealth and e go come thereby dey create relative impoverishment.

This brings me to my second subject: the sociology of taxation. If taxation is an instrument for the destruction of wealth-formation, then the question immediately becomes pressing of how it can be explained that there is taxation; that there is ever more of it; that we have experienced, in particular during the last hundred years, a steady increase not just in the absolute but also in the relative level of taxation; and that the institutions which lead the way in this process, the tax-states of the Western World, have simultaneously assumed ever more powerful positions in the arena of international politics and increasingly dominate the rest of the world.
Dis bring me come my second subject: de sociology of taxation. If taxation na instrument wey dem take dey destroy wealth-formation, den de question go quickly come dey pressing how dem fit take explain am say taxation dey; say more of am dey, say we don experienced am, in particular for de last hundred years, a steady increase for not only de absolute but also for de relative level of taxation; and also say de institutions wey dey lead dis process, de tax-states of de Western World, don get even more powerful positions for de arena of international politics and don dey dominate de rest of de world.

With these questions one leaves the realm of economic theory. Economics answers the question “What is the consequence if taxation is introduced?” It deduces its answer from an understanding of the meaning of action and the meaning of taxation as a particular type of action. Why there is taxation is the subject matter of psychology, history, or sociology. Economics, or rather praxeology, recognizes that all actions are determined by ideas, correct or incorrect, good or bad. But it does not attempt to explain what these ideas are and how people come to hold or change them. Rather, it assumes them to be given and aims at explaining the logical consequences that flow from acting upon them, whatever they are. History and sociology ask what these ideas are, how people come to entertain them, and why they act the way they do.[^16]
Wit dis questions person go leave de level of economic theory. Economic dey answer de question “wetin be de consequence if dem introduced taxation?” E get e answer from understanding of de meaning of action and de meaning of taxation as say na particular type of action. Why taxation dey na d subject matter of psychology, history or sociology. Economics, or rather praxeology, dey recognize say na ideas dey determine all actions, weda e correct or nor correct, weda e good or e bad. But e nor dey try explain wetin dis ideas be and how people come take hold or change dem. Rather, e dey assume say dem give dem and e aim na to explain de logical consequences wey dey flow wen dem act upon dem, wateva dem come be. History and Sociology go ask wetin dis ideas be, how people take dey reason am, and why dem dey act de way dem dey do.[^16] 

On a highly abstract level the answer to the question why there is steadily increasing taxation is this: The root cause for this is a slow but dramatic change in the idea of justice that has taken place in public opinion.
On a level wey high wella de abstract answer to de question why taxation dey increase steadilu na dis: De main cause of dis na slow but dramatic change for de idea of justice wey don take place for public opinion.

Let me explain. One can acquire property either through homesteading, production, and contracting, or else through the expropriation and exploitation of homesteaders, producers, or contractors. There are no other ways.[^17] Both methods are natural to mankind. Alongside production and contracting there has always been a process of nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. Just as productive enterprises can develop into firms and corporations, so can the business of expropriating and exploiting occur on a larger scale and develop into governments and states.[^18] That taxation as such exists and that there is the drive toward increased taxation should hardly come as a surprise. For the idea of nonproductive or noncontractual appropriations is almost as old as the idea of productive ones, and everyone—the exploiter certainly no less than the producer—prefers a higher income to a lower one.
Make I explain am. Person fit get property either from homesteading, production, and contracting, or else from de expropriation and exploitation of homesteaders, producers, or contractors. No oda ways dey.[^17] Both methods dey natural to mankind. Wit production and contracting a process of nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisition always dey before. Just like de way productive enterprises fit develop into firms and corportations, so also de business of expropriation and exploitation go also fit happen for larger scale and fit develop into goverments and states.[^18] Say taxation like dat dey exists and also say dem dey increase taxation nor supposed come as a surprise. For de idea of nonproductive or noncontractual appropriations na almost as old as de idea of de productive ones, and everybody---de exploiter certainly nor even less than de producer---go prefers higher income to income wey low pass.
The decisive question is this: what controls and constrains the size and growth of such a business?
De main question na dis: wetin dey control and constrains de size and growth of dat kind business?

It should be clear that the constraints on the size of firms in the business of expropriating producers and contractors are of a categorically different nature than those limiting the size of firms engaged in productive exchanges. Contrary to the claim of the public choice school, government and private firms do not do essentially the same sort of business. They are engaged in categorically different types of operations.[^19]
E need to be clear say de constraints for de size of firms for de business of expropriating producers and contractors dey a very different nature dan dose wey dey limit de size of firms wey dey engaged in productive exchanges. Against de claim of de public choice school, government and private firms nor essentially dey same kind of business. Dem dey engaged in a ery different types of operations.[^19]

The size of a productive enterprise is constrained on the one hand by consumer demand (which imposes a definite limit on the total revenue attainable), and on the other hand by the competition of other producers, which continuously forces each firm to operate with the lowest possible costs if it wishes to stay in business. For such an enterprise to grow in size the most urgent consumer wants must be served in the most efficient ways. Nothing but voluntary consumer purchases support its size.
De size of a productive enterprise dey constrained for one hand by de consumer demand (wey dey force a definite limit on de total revenue dem fit get), and fo de oda hand by de competition of other producers, wich dey always forces each firm to dey operate wit de lowest possible costs if e want make e still stay for business. For dat kind enterprise to grow in size, de wants of de most urgent consumer need to be served in de most efficient ways. Nothing else except de consumers dey voluntary buy go support e size. 

The constraints on the other type of firm, of government or the state, are altogether different. For one thing, it is absurd to say that its size is determined by demand in the same sense as the size of a private firm is determined by demand. One cannot say, by any stretch of the imagination, that the homesteaders, the producers, and the contractors who must surrender part of their assets to a government have demanded such a service. Instead, they must be coerced into accepting it, and this is conclusive proof of the fact that the service is not actually in demand at all. Hence, demand cannot be considered as a limit on the size of government. Insofar as it grows, the state grows by acting in open *contradiction* to demand.
De constraints for de oda type of firm, of government or de state, dey altogeda different. For one thing, e dey absurd to say e size dey determined by demand for same sense like de size of a private firm dey determined by demand. Person nor go fit say, even if na for imagination, say de homesteaders, de producers and de contractors who go need surrender part of dia assets for government don demanded for dat kind service. Instead, dem go dey forced to accept am, and dis proof dey conclusive of de fact say  dem nor dey demand de service at all.And so, dem nor fit consider demand as a limit to de size of government. As far say e grows, de state dey grow by acting in clear *contradiction* to demand.

The state is also not in the same way constrained by competition as is a productive firm. Unlike such a firm, the state must not keep its cost of operation at a minimum but can operate at above-minimum costs because it is able to shift its higher costs onto competitors by taxing or regulating their behavior. Thus, the size of the state also cannot be considered as constrained by cost competition. Insofar as it grows, it does so in spite of the fact that it is *not* cost-efficient.
De state in same way nor also dey constrained by competition as a productive firm. Unlike dat kind firm, de state nor need keep its cost of operation for minimum but fit operate above-minimum costs bcos e dey able to shifts e higher costs for im  competitors by taxing or regulating how dem take dey behave.. So, de size of de state also dem nor fit consider am as say cost competition dey constrained am. As far as say e dey grow, e dey do dat in spite of de fact say e *nor* dey cost-efficient.

This, however, is not to say that the size of government is not constrained at all and that the historical fluctuations in the size of states are mere random walks. It only states that the constraints on the firm “government” must be fundamentally different.
Dis, nor be to say de size of government nor dey constrained at all and also say de historical fluctuations for de size of states na mere random works. E dey only say de constraints on de fim “government” must dey fundamentally different.

Instead of being constrained by cost and demand conditions, the growth of an exploitative firm is constrained by public opinion:[^20] It is not voluntarily supported, but by its very nature employs coercion. On the other side of the same coin, coercion implies creating victims, and victims are not supporters but active or passive resisters of a firm’s size. It is conceivable that this resistance can be lastingly broken by force in the case of one man, or one group of men, exploiting one or maybe two or three others, or another group of roughly the same size. It is inconceivable, however, to imagine that force alone can account for the breaking down of resistance in the actually familiar case of small minorities operating their business of expropriating and exploiting populations tens, hundreds, or thousands of times their size.[^21] For this to happen, such a firm must have public support in addition to its coercive force. A majority of the population must accept its operations as legitimate. This acceptance can range from active enthusiasm to passive resignation. But there must be acceptance in the sense that a majority must have given up the idea of actively or passively resisting any attempt to enforce nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. Instead of displaying outrage over such actions, of showing contempt for everyone who engages in them, and of doing nothing to help make them successful (not to mention actively trying to obstruct them), a majority must actively or passively support them. Only in light of this can it be explained how the few can govern the many. State-supportive public opinion must counterbalance the resistance of victimized property owners to the extent that active resistance appears futile.
Instead of am to dey constrained by cost and demand conditions, de growth of an exploitative firm dey constrained by public opinion:[^20] E dey only dey supported voluntarily, but by e nature dey use force. For de oda side of same coin, force dey mean to create victims, and victims nor be supporters but na active or passive resisters of a firm’s size. E dey sure say dis resistance fit break last last if na case of one man, or one group of men, exploiting one maybe two or three odas, or anoda group wey get same size. Dem nor fit howeva reason or imagine say only force go fit account for de breakdown of resistance for de actually familiar case of dem small minorities wey dey operate dia business of expropriating and exploiting populations tens, hundreds or even thousands of times dia size.[^21] For dis to happen, dat kind firm must get public support even if e already dey use force. A majority of de population go need accept e operations say e legit. Dis acceptance fit range from active enthusiasm to active resignation. But acceptance need to dey in de sense say majority of dem don give up de idea of actively or passively resisting any attempt wey dem wan take enforce nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. Instead of to dey show serious vexing for dat kind actions, or to dey show vex for everybody wey dey un am, and even to dey do nothing to help make dem successful (not even to mention actively trying to block dem), a majority need to actively o passively support dem. Na only when dis clear dem for fit explain how de small dey govern de many. State-supportive public opinion need to counterbalance de resistance of de property owners wey dem victimized to such extent say to resist na waste of time.

The state of public opinion also imposes a constraint on the size of the state in another respect. Every firm in the large-scale business of property expropriation must naturally aim to be a monopolist in a definite territory, for one can only prosper in such a business so long as there is something that can be expropriated. However, if competition were allowed in the business of expropriating, there would obviously be nothing left to take. Hence, in order to stay in business, one must be a monopolist.
De position wey public opinion dey even reduce how de size of the state suppose be in anoda respect. All of de company wey dey do business wey big wella for property expropriation been dey run say make na only dem dey do business for dat side, cos say de only way to hammer for dat kin business na if something wey dem fit expropriate dey there. Howeva, if to say competition dey allowed for inside de expropriation business, nothing go remain to carry for mandem again. So na to beome monopolist na em dem go dey run after now so dat dem go still fit dey for business.

Even if there is no internal competition, competition between governments operating in different territories still exists, and it is this competition that imposes severe limits on the size of government. On the one hand, it opens up the possibility that people may vote with their feet against a government and leave its territory if they perceive other territories as offering less exploitative living conditions. Naturally, each state must see this as a crucial problem, for it literally lives off a population, and any population loss is thus a loss of potential state-income.[^22] Again, the state of public opinion is of utmost importance for maintaining exploitative rule. Only if the state succeeds in generating the impression in the general public that that state’s own territory compares favorably, or at least tolerably well with others will it be able to secure and expand its position.
Even if say internal competition between business no dey sef, de competition wey dey between governments wey dey operate for inside different territories still dey gidigba, and na dis competition dey limit how big de government fit grow. For one side, de ting open up de possibility say make some people wan dey vote with dem feet sef against any government and to comot de area if dem feel say other territories dey offer living conditions wey dey less exploitative. Normal, all of de state must see dis kin ting as one major problem, cos say e dey suffer one population, and any of de population wey loss na loss also for state-income. [^22] Again, de condition wey public opinion dey dey very important to dey maintain de kin rule wey dey exploitative. Na only if de state succeed as dem dey generate de impression for de whole public say we fit take de state own territory sef compare favorably, or atleast tolerably well na em e go fit dey able to secure and expand em position.

Public opinion also plays a decisive role in the case of interstate aggression. While not a logical necessity, the nature of a state as an exploitative enterprise still makes it highly likely (not the least because of the just addressed problem of population movements) that it will become engaged in aggression against a “foreign” territory, or that it must defend itself against such aggression from other states.[^23] Moreover, in order to emerge successfully from such interstate wars or warlike actions, a state must be in command of sufficient (in relative terms) economic resources that alone make its actions sustainable. However, these resources can only be provided by a productive population. Thus, to secure the means necessary to win wars and avoid being confronted with slackening productive outputs while at war, public opinion again turns out to be the decisive variable controlling the size of government. Only if popular support for the state’s war exists can it be sustained and possibly won.
Public opinion sef dey play important role wen de matta concern interstate aggression. While e no be logical necessity, de nature wey state get as em be one kin exploitative enterprise go still make am very likely (not de least cos of de population movement problem wey just dey addressed) say em go become engaged in aggression for one “foreign” territory, or say em fit defend itself against dat kin aggression from de other states.[^23] Also, for to emerge successfully under dat kin interstate war or warlike actions, a state gat dey in command of economic resources wey plenty (in relative terms) and wey go make e actions dey sustainable. Howeva, dis kin resources only fit dey provided by population wey dey productive. Therefore, for to secure de necessary means to win wars and avoid confrontation wit slackening productive outputs while dem dey at war, na public opinion go be de decisive variable wey go control de government size. Na only if say popular support for state war dey na em de war go fit dey sustainable and possible to win.

Finally, the state of public opinion limits the size of government in yet a third way. While the state maintains its position vis-à-vis the exploited population through coercion and the successful management of public opinion, to maintain its own internal order, which regulates the relationships between the various branches of government and its employees, there is nothing else at its disposal but public opinion, for clearly, no one outside the state exists who could enforce its internal rules upon it. Rather, the enforcement must be accomplished exclusively by means of supportive public opinion among state employees themselves in the various branches of government.[^24] That is, the president cannot coerce the general to go to war—in fact, the greater physical strength would probably be on the general’s side; and the general in turn cannot coerce his soldiers to do the fighting and killing—in fact, they could smash him anytime. President and general can only succeed because of favorable intrastate public opinion, and only insofar as the overwhelming majority of the state employees at least passively supports their actions as legitimate. If, in the various branches of government, a large majority of them were strictly opposed to the enforcement of presidential policy, it could not be put into action successfully. The general who thinks most of his troops consider the war illegitimate or who thinks that the Congress, the IRS, the large majority of public educators and the so-called social services regard such actions as outrageous and to be openly opposed, would face an impossible task even if he himself supported the presidential command.[^25]
Finally, de state of public opinion dey limit de size of government, in yet a third way. While em be say na de state dey maintain e position for de exploited population through coercion and de successful management of public opinion, to maintain e own internal order, wey dey regulate de relationship between all of de branches of de government and dem employees, nothing else dey at dem diposal except public opinion, cos say no one outside de state dey wey fit enforce em internal rules on top am. Rather, de enforcement gat dey accomplished exclusively through supportive public opinion among state employees sef for de various branches of government.[^24] E mean say de president no fit coerce de general to go war- in fact, most of de physical strength go gat dey de generals angle, and de general sef no fit coerce em soldiers to do all de fighting and killing- in fact, dem fit kill am anytime sef. De president and general only fit succeed cos of favourable intrastate public opinion, and only as much as de plenty majority of de state employees atleast partially support dem action as legitimate. If to say, in de various branches of government, a large majority of dem dey strictly opposed to de enforcement of presidential policy, e no still fit engage successfully. De general wey think most of em troop consider de war illegitimate or wey think de Congress, de IRS, de large majority of public educators and de social services people regard those kin action as outrageous and wey go get open opposition, go face an impossible task even if e emsef support de presidential command.[^25] 

With public opinion rather than demand and cost conditions thus identified as the constraining force on the size of government, I return to my original explanation of the phenomenon of ever-increasing taxation as “simply” a change in prevailing ideas.
As public opinion instead of demand and cost condition don dey identified as de constraining force for de size of government, I go return to my original explanation of de phenomenon wey follow ever-increasing taxation as “simply” change wey dey for prevailing ideas.

If it is public opinion that ultimately limits the size of an exploitative firm, then an explanation of its growth in purely ideological terms is justified. Indeed, any other explanation, not in terms of ideological changes but of changes in “objective” conditions must be considered wrong. The size of government does not increase because of any objective causes over which ideas have no control and certainly not because there is a demand for it. It grows because the ideas that prevail in public opinion of what is just and what is wrong have changed. What once was regarded by public opinion as an outrage, to be treated and dealt with as such, has become increasingly accepted as legitimate.
If to say na public opinion wey dey ultimately limit de size of an exploitative firm, then an explanation of em growth for purely identified terms dey justified. Really, any other explanation, ones wey no dey in terms of ideological changes but ones wey dey change for “objective” conditions gat be considered wrong. De size of government no dey increase cos of any objective cause on top which ideas no get control and certainly no be cos of say demand dey for am. E dey grow cos de ideas wey wey dey prevail for public opinion of wetin dey just and wetin dey wrong don change. Wetin dey regarded once by public opinion as outrage, wey go dey treated and dealt with don become increasingly accepted as legitimate.

What has happened regarding the general public’s conception of justice?[^26]
Wetin don happen regarding de conception of justice by general public? [^26]

[^16]: To make this distinction between economics and history or sociology is not to say, of course, that economics is of no importance for these latter disciplines. In fact, economics is indispensable for all other social sciences. While the reverse is not the case, economics can be developed and advanced without historical or sociological knowledge. The only consequence of doing so is that such economics would probably not be very interesting, as it would be written without consideration of real examples or instances of application (as if one were to write on the economics of taxation even though there had never been an actual example of it in all of history), for it would formulate what could not possibly happen in the social world, or what would have to happen provided that certain conditions were in fact fulfilled. Thus, any historical or sociological explanation is logically constrained by the laws as espoused by economic theory, and any account by a historian or sociologist in violation of these laws must be treated as ultimately confused. On the relationship between economic theory and history see also Ludwig von Mises, Theory and History (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Praxeology and Economic Science (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).
[^16]: To make de distinction between economics and history or sociology no be say, of course, economics no dey important to these latter disciplines. In fact, economics dey indispensable for all other social sciences. While de reverse no be de case, economics fit dey developed and advanced without historical or sociological knowledge. De only consequence of doing so be say such economics probably no go dey interesting, as dem go write am without consideration of real examples or instances wey dey don apply am before (cos if say person wan write for economics of taxation even though actual example of am never dey history), cos em go formulate wetin go happen for de social world, or wetin no fit happen for social world, or wetin go gat happen as far as certain conditions dey fulfilled. Thus, any historical or sociological explanation dey logically constrained by de laws as economic theory show am, and any account wey come from an historian or sociologist in violation of de laws gat be treated as ultimately confused. As per de relationship between economic theory and history see dis one too Ludwig von Mises, Theory and History (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Praxeology and Economic Science (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^17]: See on this also Franz Oppenheimer, The State (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914) esp. pp. 24–27; Rothbard, Power and Market, chap. 2; Hoppe, A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism, chap. 2.
[^17]: See dis one too Franz Oppenheimer, The State (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914) esp. pp. 24–27; Rothbard, Power and Market, chap. 2; Hoppe, A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism, chap. 2.

[^18]: On the theory of the state as developed in the following see—in addition to the works cited in note 17—in particular Herbert Spencer, Social Statics (New York: Schalkenbach Foundation, 1970); Auberon Herbert, The Right and Wrong of Compulsion by the State (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1978); Albert J. Nock, Our Enemy, the State (Tampa, Fla.: Hallberg Publishing, 1983); Murray N. Rothbard, For a New Liberty (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, The Ethics of Liberty (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); Anthony de Jasay, The State (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).
[^18]: On de theory of de state wey dey developed in de following, see – plus de works cited for note 17- in particular Herbert Spencer, Social Statics (New York: Schalkenbach Foundation, 1970); Auberon Herbert, The Right and Wrong of Compulsion by the State (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1978); Albert J. Nock, Our Enemy, the State (Tampa, Fla.: Hallberg Publishing, 1983); Murray N. Rothbard, For a New Liberty (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, The Ethics of Liberty (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); Anthony de Jasay, The State (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).

[^19]:  This central idea of the public choice school has been expressed by its foremost representatives as follows:
[^19]:  De central idea wey de public choice school get been don dey expressed by em foremost representatives as follows:


> Both se economic relation and de political relation represent cooperation on de part of two or more individuals. De market and de state na both devices thru which co-operation dey organized and made possible. Men co-operate thru exchange of goods and services in organized markets, and such co-operation dey imply mutual gain. De individual dey enter into an exchange relationship wey he dey move e own interest by providing some product or service wey dey  of direct benefit to de individual on de oda side of de transaction. At base, political or collective action under de individualistic view of de State dey much de same. Two or more individuals go find am mutually advantageous to join forces to accomplish certain common purposes. In a very real sense, dem “exchange” and devote resources to dd construction of de common good. (James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* [Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press], p. 192)

Surely, de most amazing tin about dat kind  “new theory of politics” na say anybody take am seriously. Remarks wey Joseph A. Schumpeter make on such views:

> De theory wey construe taxe on de analogy of club dues or de purchase of de service of, say, a doctor dey only prove how far removed dis part of de social sciences dey from scientific habits of mind. (*Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy* [New York: Harper, 1942], p. 198)

And H.L. Mencken get dis to say regarding a thesis such as Buchanan’s and Tullock’s:

> De average man, whateva e errors odawise, at least dey see clearly say government na sometin wey dey outside him and outside de generality of e fellow men—dat na separate, independent and often hostile power, only partly under e control, and capable of doing am great harm…. Na fact of no significance say robbing de government  everywhere dey regarded as a crime of less magnitude dan robbing an individual, or even a corporation? … Wen a private citizen dey robbed a worthy man dey deprived of de fruits of e industry and thrift; wen de government dey robbed de worst wey fit happen na  say certain rogues and loafers get less money to play wit dan dem get before. De notion say dem don earn dat money nor go ever dey entertained; to most sensible men e go seem ludicrous. Dem be simply rascals who, by accidents of law, get somewhat dubious right to a share for de earnings of dia fellow men. Wen dat share dey diminished by private enterprise de business dey, on de whole, far more laudable dan not. (*A Mencken Chrestomathy* [New York: Vintage Books, 1949] pp. 146–47)

[^20]: See on dis also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Anatomy of the State” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974), esp. pp. 37–42.

[^21]: Person fit tink say5de government fit accomplish dat kind feat by merely improving e weaponry: by threatening wit atomic bombs instead of wit guns and rifles, so to speak. Howeva, since realistically person gats assume say de technological know-how of such improved weaponry go hardly dey secret, especially if e dey in fact applied, den wit de state’s improved instruments for instilling fear de victims’ ways amid means of resisting improve as well. Hence, such advances gats dey ruled out as an explanation of wetin need to dey explained.

[^22]: Witness de all-too-numerous states wey go so far as to shoot everyone down witout mercy wey commit no oda sin dan to try leave a territory and move elsewhere!

[^23]: On de intimate relationship between state and war see de important study by Ekkehart Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1985); also Charles Tilly, “War Making and State Making as Organized Crime” in Peter Evans et al., eds., *Bringing the State Back In* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).

[^24]: This insight (which refutes all talk about the impossibility of anarchism in showing that intra-governmental relations are, in fact, a case of—political—anarchy) has been explained in a highly important article by Alfred G. Cuzán, “Do We Ever Really Get Out of Anarchy,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979).

> Wherever earthly governments dey established or exist, anarchy dey officially prohibited for all members of society, usually referred to as subjects or citizens. Dem nor fit relate to each other again on dia own terms…. Rather, all members of society gat to accept an external “third party”—a government—into dia relationships, a third party wit de coercive powers to enforce e judgments and punish detractors…. Howeva, dat kind “third party” arrangement for society dey non-existent among dose wey dey exercise de power of government demselves. In oda words,  no “third party” dey to make and enforce judgments among de individual members wey make up de third party itself. De rulers still dey in a state of anarchy *thru* each oda. Dem dey settle disputes *among demselves*, witout regard for a Government (an entity outside demselves). Anarchy still dey exist. Only whereas witout government na market or natural anarchy,  now na *political* anarchy, an anarchy inside power. (Cuzán, pp. 152–53)

[^25]: One of de classic expositors of dis idea na David Hume. For e essay, “Of The First Principles of Government,” he write:

> Notin dey appear more surprising to dose, wey dey consider human affairs wit  philosophical eye, dan de easiness wit which many dey governed by de few; and de implicit submission, wit which men dey resign dia own sentiments and passions for dia rulers own. Wen we enquire by which means dis wonder dey effected, we go find, say as FORCE always dey de side of de governed, de governors nor get anytin to support dem apart from  opinion. E as e be so,mean say na only on opinion nai government dey founded; and dis maxim don extends to de most despotic and most military governments, as well as to de most free and most popular. De soldan of EGYPT, or de emperor of ROME, fit drive e harmless subjects, like brute beasts, against dia sentiments and inclination: but e gat, at least, don lead e *mamalukes*, or *praetorian bands*, like men, by dia opinion. (*Essays, Moral, Political and Literary* [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971], p. 19)

[^26]: See on de following in particular also Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right: The Prospects for Liberty” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays*.
