###

Dis go suffice say na explanation for dem Mises's answer onto quest for wetin economics dey ontop. I go com turn face my second goal: D explanation of why dem and how dem praxeology dey giv d place wey epistemology go tanda ontop. Mises don sabi dis and dey convince of d boku importance of dis insight for normal philosophy. Still he no treat d mata for a systematic fashion. Dia no dey more dan shikini brief remark wey concern dis wahala interspersed all ova im body of writing.[^14] Thus, for d following I go try make I break tear rubber ground.

[^14]: Mises dey write:

::::> [K]nowledge na tool of action so. Im work na to dey advise man on how to dey move on for im endeavors to comot uneasiness. ...D category of action na im be d ogbonge category of for dem human knowledge. E mean say all dem categories of logic and d category of regularity and casuality dem. E mean say d category of tym and dat one of value dem. ...For acting, d mind of d individual dey see itself say e dey different from im environment, d external world, and dey try to observe im environment so make im take influence all dem events wey dey happen for am. (*D Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science dem*, pp. 35–36)

::::Or:

::::> Both, tinkin wey dey priori and reasoning for anoda hand and man pikin action dey d oda, na manifestations of d mind. Reason and action dey congeneric and homogenous dem, dem two aspects for d same phenomenon. (Ibid., p. 42)

::::Still e dey leave d mata more or make im less for dis and conclude say “no be d scope of praxeology to dey investigate d relation of tinkin and action dem” (*Man pikin Action*, p. 25).

I go start to dey explain maself as I dey introduce a second a priori axiom and to dey clarify im relation to d axiom of action. For understanding na d key to solve our wahala. D second axiom na d so-called “a priori of dem argumentation”, wey dey state say humans dey capable of argumentation and hence sabi d meaning of truth and validity dem.[^15] For d case of d action wey be axiom, e dey indisputable. E dey impossible say to deny say person fit argue, as d very denial itself go turn argument. In fact, person no fit talk to imself silently “I no fit argue” witout therbey dey contradict oneself. One no fit argue say one no fit argue. Nor say one fit dispute wey e know wetin e mean to make truth or to validity claim witout make dem implicitly claim d negation of dis proposition say e dey true.

[^15]: For d priori of argumentation u fit see Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*, vol. 2.

E no dey hard to detect say both a priori axioms-of action and argumentation-dey related intimately. For one hand, to sabi dis regardin action and argumentation and as dem take relate to each oda nid argumentation. Tus, for dis sense, argumentation gaz be k considered say e dey ogbonge dan action dem, dor if argumentation no dey notin wey dem fit talk say dem sabi ontop action. however, argumentation itseld dey show say argumentation presupposes action because d validity claims dem fir only discuss am for d course of an argumentation if dem individuals wey do am before sabi wetin e mean to act and to get knowledge wey dey implied in action. Thus, both d meaning of action for evry evry and argumentation for particular gaz be thought of as somtin wey dey logically necessary interwoven strands dem of a priori knowledge.

Wetin dis insight into d interrelation wey dey between d priori of action and d priori of argumentation dem dey suggest d followin tins: Traditionally, d work of epistemology don dey conceived of say na dat of to dey formulate wetin dem fit sabi say na true say a priori and wetin dem fit sabi say a priori wey no be d subject of a priori knowledge. To recognize, wetin we just do, say knowledge claims dem raise am and dem decide ontop for d course of argumentation and dat dis na undeniably so, person fit com reconstruct d work of epistemology more precisely to dat one of formulating dem propositions wey dey argumentatively; and to delineate d range of dat kyn priori knowledge from d realm of propositions wey im validity dem no fit establish am for dis way but nid additional, contingent information for dia validation, or dem no fit validate am rara and so na just metaphysical talks for d pejorative sense for d term metaphysical.

Still, wetin dis mean na d fact of to dey argue? Na to dis question dat our insight to d inextricable interconnection wey dey between d a priori of argumentation and dat of action dey giv answer. For evry evry level, dem no fit deny am argumentatively say argumentation dey presupposes action and dat say arguments, and d knowledge wey dey emodied for dem body, na dose of actors. More specifically, dem no fit deny say d knowledge itself na category of action; dat d structure of knowledge gaz dey constrained by d peculiar function wey knowledge fulfill within d framework for action categories dem; and say d existence of such structural constraints no fit everly dey disproved by ani knowledge lyk dat.

Na for dis sense dat d insights wey dey d praxeology suppose dey regarded for providing d foundations of epistemology dem. Knowledge na a category wey dey different from dose wey dem explain before-from ends and means dem. D ends wey we wan reach through our actions dem and d means wey we dey employ so to do so na values wey we no dey see wella. D values wey dey attached to our goals dem na subject to chop and are removed and make dem destroy for chop and thus gaz forever be produced anew. D means wey dem employ gaz be economized, self. E no dey so, however, make we giv respect to knowledge, regardless of weda person tink say e mean or na end itself. For sure, say we collect knowledge nid am for scarce means, at least person body and tym so. Yet once we don collect knowledge, e no dey scarce again. E no fit dey chopped, nor say d services wey e fit giv as a means com subject to depletion. Once e dey dia, na inexhaustible resource and incorporates value wey dey for lyf (provided say dem no just forget am).[^16] Yet knowledge is not a free good in the same sense as air, under normal circumstances, is a free good. Instead, it is a category of action. It is not only a mental ingredient of each and every action, quite unlike air, but more importantly, knowledge, and not air, is subject to validation, which is to say that it must prove to fulfill a positive function for an actor within the invariant constraints of the categorical framework of actions. It is the task of epistemology to clarify what these constraints are and what one can thus know about the structure of knowledge as such.

[^16]: On this fundamental difference between economic (scarce) means and knowledge see also Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 128, 661.

While such recognition of the praxeological constraints on the structure of knowledge might not immediately strike one as of great significance in itself, it does have some highly important implications. For one thing, with this insight one recurring difficulty of rationalist philosophy is eliminated. It has been a common quarrel with rationalism in the Leibniz-Kant tradition that it seemed to imply a sort of idealism. Realizing that a priori true propositions could not possibly be derived from observations, rationalism explained how a priori knowledge could then be possible by adopting the model of an active mind, as opposed to the empiricist model of a passive, mirror-like mind in the tradition of Locke and Hume. According to rationalist philosophy, a priori true propositions had their foundation in the operation of principles of thinking which one could not possibly conceive of as operating otherwise; they were grounded in categories of an active mind. However, as empiricists have been only too eager to point out, the obvious critique of such a position is that if this were indeed the case, it could not be explained why such mental categories would fit reality. Rather, one would be forced to accept the absurd idealistic assumption that reality would have to be conceived of as a creation of the mind in order to claim that a priori knowledge could incorporate any information about the structure of reality. Clearly, such an assertion seems to be justified when faced with programmatic statements of rationalist philosophers such as the following by Kant: “So far it has been assumed that our knowledge had to conform to reality”, instead it should be assumed “that observational reality should conform to our mind”.[^17]

[^17]: Kant, *Kritik der reinen Vernunft*, p. 25\. Whether or not such an interpretation of Kant’s epistemology is indeed correct is a very different matter. Clarifying this problem is of no concern here, however. For an activist or constructivist interpretation of Kantian philosophy see Kambartel, *Erfahrung und Struktur*, chap. 3; also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Handeln und Erkennen* (Bern: Lang, 1976).

Recognizing knowledge as being structurally constrained by its role in the framework of action categories provides the solution to such a complaint, for as soon as this is realized, all idealistic suggestions of rationalist philosophy disappear, and an epistemology claiming that a priori true propositions exist becomes a realistic epistemology instead. Understood as constrained by action categories, the seemingly unbridgeable gulf between the mental on the one hand and the real, outside physical world on the other is bridged. So constrained, a priori knowledge must be as much a mental thing as a reflection of the structure of reality since it is only through actions that the mind comes into contact with reality, so to speak. Acting is a cognitively guided adjustment of a physical body in physical reality. Thus, there can be no doubt that a priori knowledge, conceived of as an insight into the structural constraints imposed on knowledge qua knowledge of actors, must indeed correspond to the nature of things. The realistic character of such knowledge would manifest itself not only in the fact that one could not *think* it to be otherwise, but in the fact that one could not *undo* its truth.

Yet there are more specific implications involved in recognizing the praxeological foundations of epistemology, apart from the general one that in substituting the model of the mind of an actor acting by means of a physical body for the traditional rationalist model of an active mind, a priori knowledge immediately becomes realistic knowledge (so realistic indeed that it cannot be undone). More specifically, in light of this insight decisive support is given to those deplorably few rationalist philosophers who—against the empiricist Zeitgeist—stubbornly maintain on various philosophical fronts that a priori true propositions about the real world are possible.[^18] Moreover, with the recognition of praxeological constraints on the structure of knowledge, these various rationalist endeavors become systematically integrated into one unified body of rationalist philosophy.

[^18]: In addition to the works mentioned in note 7 see Brand Blanshard, *The Nature of Thought* (London: Allen and Unwin, 1921); Morris Cohen, *Reason and Nature* (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1931); idem, *Preface to Logic* (New York: Holt, 1944); A. Pap, *Semantics and Necessary Truth* (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1958); Saul Kripke, “Naming and Necessity”, in Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman, eds., *Semantics of Natural Language* (New York: Reidel, 1972); Hugo Dingler, *Die Ergreifung des Wirklichen* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1969); idem *Aufbau der exakten Fundamentalwissenschaft* (Munich: Eidos, 1964); Wilhelm Kamlah and Paul Lorenzen, *Logische Propädeutik *(Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1968); Paul Lorenzen, *Methodisches Denken* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968); idem, *Normative Logic and Ethics* (Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969); Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*.

When one understands that knowledge as displayed in argumentation is a peculiar category of action, the validity of the perennial rationalist claim that the laws of logic—beginning here with the most fundamental ones of propositional logic and of Junctors (“and”, “or”, “if-then”, “not”) and Quantors (“there is”, “all”, “some”)—are a priori true propositions about reality and not mere verbal stipulations regarding the transformation rules of arbitrarily chosen signs, as empiricist-formalists would have it, becomes clear. They are as much laws of thinking as of reality because they are laws that have their ultimate foundation in action and can not be undone by any actor. In each and every action, an actor identifies some specific situation and categorizes it one way rather than another in order to be able to make a choice. It is this which ultimately explains the structure of even the most elementary propositions (like “Socrates is a man”) as consisting of a proper name or some identifying expression for the naming or identifying of something and a predicate to assert or deny some specific property of the named or identified object. It is this which explains the cornerstones of logic: the laws of identity and contradiction. And it is this universal feature of action and choosing which also explains our understanding of the categories “there is”, “all”, “some”, “and”, “or”, “if-then”, and “not”.[^19] One can, say, of course, that something can be “a” and “non-a” at the same time, or that “and” means this rather than something else. But one cannot *undo* the law of contradiction and one cannot undo the real definition of “and”. Simply by virtue of acting with a physical body in physical space we invariably affirm the law of contradiction and invariably display our true constructive knowledge of the meaning of “and” and “or”.

[^19]: On rationalist interpretations of logic see Blanshard, *Reason and Analysis*, chaps. VI, X; Paul Lorenzen, *Einführung in die operative Logik und Mathematik* (Frankfurt/M.: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, 1970); Kuno Lorenz, *Elemente der Sprachkritik* (Frankfurt/M: Suhrkamp, 1970); idem, “Die dialogische Rechtfertigung der effektiven Logik”, in Friedrich Kambartel and Jürgen Mittelstrass, eds., *Zum normativen Fundament der Wissenschaft* (Frankfurt/M.: Athenaum, 1973).

::::On the propositional character of language and experience, in particular, see Kamlah and Lorenzen, *Logische Propädeutik*, chap. 1; Lorenzen, *Normative Logic and Ethics*, chap. 1. Lorenzen writes:

::::> I call a usage a convention if I know of another usage which I could accept instead. However I do not know of another behavior which could replace the use of elementary sentences. If I did not accept proper names and predicators, I would not know how to speak at all. ...Each proper name is a convention... but to use proper names at all is not a convention: it is a unique pattern of linguistic behavior.

::::> Therefore, I am going to call it “logical”. The same is true with predicators. Each predicator is a convention. This is shown by the existence of more than one natural language. But all languages use predicators. (Ibid., p. 16)

::::See also J. Mittelstrass, “Die Wiederkehr des Gleichen”, *Ratio*, 1966.

::::On the law of identity and contradiction, in particular, see Blanshard, *Reason and Analysis*, pp. 276ff., 423ff.

::::On a critical evaluation of 3- or more-valued logics as either meaningless symbolic formalisms or as logically presupposing an understanding of the traditional two-valued logic see Wolfgang Stegmüller, *Hauptströmungen der Gegenwartsphilosophie* (Stuttgart: Kröner, 1975), vol. 2, pp. 182–91; Blanshard, *Reason and Analysis*, pp. 269–75\. Regarding the many-valued or open-textured logic proposed by Friedrich Waismann, Blanshard notes:

::::> We can only agree with Dr. Waismann—and with Hegel—that the black-and-white distinctions of formal logic are quite inadequate to living thought. But why should one say, as Dr. Waismann does, that in adopting a more differentiated logic one is adopting an alternative system which is incompatible with black-and-white logic? What he has actually done is to recognize a number of gradations *within* the older meaning of the word “not”. We do not doubt that such gradations are there, and indeed as many more as he cares to distinguish. But a refinement of the older logic is not an abandonment of it. It is still true that the colour I saw yesterday was either a determinate shade of yellow or not, even though the “not” may cover a multitude of approximations, and even though I shall never know which was the shade I saw. (Ibid., pp. 273–74)
