### De Austrians School of Economics and de Prospects of Rationalist Reconstruction of Ethics and Economics

De fact say positivism quickly dey refuted as a self-contradictory philosophical system naturally nor *help* e cause. Howeva, due to de self-serving nature of de positivist doctrine for dose wey dey positions of governmental power e also nor do much to reduce positivism’s popularity. Much more bin dey needed to defeat positivism dan to prove am logically false: England take decades of social experimentation, of trying on  ever-increasing scale to prove world-wide and within each nation state say  no ethical and economic laws dey, say notin na taboo, and say everytin dey possible. E take dd economic stagnation of de Western welfare democracies wey start for de late 60’s and early 70’s; de enduring impoverishment of de Third World nations decades after dia decolonization; and de gradual, and since de late 80’s—after more dan 70 years of experimenting—de breathtakingly rapid economic collapse of de socialist East Bloc countries.[^24] Outside of de real world, for academia, dat is, e take de temporary disappearance of ethics and political theory, and dia substitution by linguistic analysis, operationally meaningless moonshine talk, or interest group politics and bargaining theories.[^25] E require de degeneration of economics into either empirically meaningless symbolic exercises, wey nor get resemblance whatsoeva to wetin done once be de subject matter of de classics of economic thought (except for some occasional, economically sounding term[^26] produced by, at best, second-rate mathematicians for no actual audience at all, but only to dey collect dust for de tax-supported libraries of dis world); or e require e degeneration into  mighty econometric forecasting industry, wey e  futility dey painfully obvious to everybody , including de politicians and government bureaucrats who subsidized am so as to employ am for purposes of “scientific legitimation.”[^27] E require dd default of de Keynesian system, wit de advent of dd allegedly impossible phenomenon of stagflation for de mid-70’s; de breakdown of de monetarist paradigm, after a long series of patently false predictions from de late 70’s on through de 80’s; and de complete, worldwide bankruptcy of Marxist economics.[^28]

[^24]: For interpretation of de twentieth century as de apogee of dd philosophy of social engineering and relativism see Paul Johnson’s magnificent *Modern Times* (New York: Harper and Row, 1983).

[^25]: See also Veatch, *Rational Man*; idem, *For an Ontology of Morals: A Critique of Contemporary Ethical Theory* (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1971); idem, *Human Rights: Facts or Fancy?* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985).

[^26]: For example, Gary North suggests one

::::> look any page wey de 1983 economics [Nobel] prize winner, Gerald Debreu write, *Theory of Value: An Axiomatic Analysis of Economic Equilibrium*, wey dey e eighth printing in 1979—a testimony to de honors of graduate study in economics. De only hint of reality for de entire book dey for p. 29, de words, “No. 2 Red Winter Wheat.” (Gary North, “Why Murray Rothbard Will Never Win the Nobel Prize!,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty, Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* [Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988], pp. 89–90)

[^27]: On the degeneration of the social sciences in particular check de brilliant observations by Stanislav Andreski, *Social Science as Sorcery* (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1972); Charles Sykes, *ProfScam: Professors and the Demise of Higher Education* (Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 1988).

[^28]: Also see Murray N. Rothbard, *For a New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 9; idem, “The Hermeneutical Invasion of Philosophy and Economics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1989): 54–55; idem, “Is There Life After Reaganomics,” in Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., ed., *The Free Market Reader* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988), esp. p. 378; idem, “Ronald Reagan; An Autopsy,” *Liberty* II, no. 4 (March 1989).

Still positivism neva die. Howeva, since de mid-70’s de price of decades of social relativism and engineering don dey too high to be ignored or simply explained away. Gradually, one philosophical crisis situation don emerge. E nor dey surprising say, wit positivism finally losing ground oda varieties of relativism, wey don dey submerged during de positivist reign, don resurface and dey try fill de widening ideological vacuum. Associated with names such as hermeneutics, rhetoric, ultra-subjectivism, and deconstructionism, an academic movement of sorts is underway that is trying to revive the old message of nihilism—that there is no such thing as truth—and which ascribes the failure of positivism not to its relativism, but to the fact that it is not relativistic enough in continuing to allow for *empirical* (hypothetical) truths rather than for no truths at all.[^29]

[^29]: For a critical evaluation of de new nihilism see Henry Veatch, “Deconstruction in Philosophy: Has Rorty Made It the Denouement of Contemporary Analytical Philosophy?,” *Review of Metaphysics* 39 (1985); Jonathan Barnes, “A Kind of Integrity,” *London Review of Books* (November 6, 1986); Rothbard, “The Hermeneutical Invasion of Philosophy and Economics”; Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism.”

But de crisis don also bring back de philosophy of social rationalism wey don for long demonstrate de falsity of positivism but fall enter  oblivion during de decades of positivist supremacy. Sparked by de Nobel-prize award in 1974 to Friedrich August von Hayek, de arch-rationalist Austrian School of economics, for de tradition of Carl Menger, Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk and, above all, Ludwig von Mises, Hayek’s teacher, and Murray N. Rothbard, don experience  resounding revival. Wey dem remove for decades from de higher reaches of subsidized academia because of e unpalatable implications for dose wey dey power and relegated to an unobtrusive existence for de underworld of non-University, real-world intellectuals, de Austrian School don steadily gain momentum and don grow into a genuine mass movement, with an increasing number of academic bastions as well as a continuously swelling grass roots support. In fact, spearheaded by de Ludwig von Mises Institute, founded in de mid-80’s, de movement don take international dimension with a rapidly spreading Mises-renaissance among intellectual circles for de countries of Eastern Europe. Faced with de total collapse of socialism and de exhaustion of all governmental authority and legitimacy, and confronted wit de task of de immediate and radical reconstruction of dia countries, de advice wey empirically meaningless mathematical economics, or econometrics, fit give or wey go fit dey derived from Keynesianism, Monetarism, Rational Expectationism or, worse still, Hermeneuticism, go fit only appear to dem as ridiculously inappropriate. For dia emergency situation, na only de Austrian School dey offer  unambiguous, radical, and constructive answer: Nor be only say truths dey exist for de social sciences, but dere dey exist a priori, nonhypothetical truths wey nobody fit undo. The truth dey as simple as fundamental: sat private property and private property rights na  indisputably valid, absolute principle of ethics and de basis for continuous “optimal” economic progress; and dat in order to arise from de ruins of socialism, notin go suffice but an uncompromising privatization of each and all property and de return to a contractual society based on de recognition of de absoluteness of private property rights.[^30]

[^30]: For a critical assessment of de revolution in Eastern Europe see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “The Collapse of Socialism and the Future of Eastern Europe,” *Kwasny Economics* II, no. 6 (October 30, 1989); idem, *Desocialization in a United Germany* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1991).

Truly, de Austrian School dey represent demost ambitious of all forms of social rationalism with e unyielding contention say nonhypothetical a priori empirical knowledge within the field of de social sciences dey exists, and dat na ethics and economics (wey contain dis knowledge) wey dey analogous to logic and protophysics as de absolutely indispensable foundation of all empirical social research. Further even, de Austrian School alone don substantiate dis contention by offering  completely developed, consistent, and all-comprehensive *positive* theory of ethics and economics.[^31]

[^31]: See in particular Mises, *Human Action*; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*; idem, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands: Humanities Press, 1982).

Indirectly, de basic claim of Austrianism don already dey established. During de above refutation of positivism e dey demonstrated say while knowledge and actions nor fit dey conceived of as caused (i.e., predictable on de basis of time-invariantly operating effect variables), any action, by virtue of say you dey try  bring about some given goal, presupposes  causally structured physical reality. E clear say , dis insight itself represents a perfect example of de possibility of nonhypothetical social knowledge: e formulates knowledge about actions wey no actor fit possibly discover to dey false, bcos any such discovery go actually presuppose e validity. Austrianism in fact merely dey claim say much more dey implied for we own reflectively gained knowledge of wetin dey to act dan dus, which no actor fit as e be possibly falsify.

De Austrian theory set out from two systematically interrelated axioms, both of which dey nonhypothetically true. De first na de “axiom of action”: de proposition say humans act, or more precisely, say I dey act now. E nor fit dey denied say dis proposition na truth, since de denial go eself be action. Even self nobody fit intentionally *not* act, bcos dis, too, go be action. As e be so detruth of de axiom literally nor fit dey undone.[^32]

[^32]: See Mises, *Human Action*, part 1.

De second axiom na de “a priori of argumentation”. Wetin we don do here all along—as I dey write dis study and de reader dey read am—dey engage in argumentation. If nor be for argumentation, debate for nor dey about de truth or falsity of social relativism or rationalism and de status of ethics and economics. Na only silence or meaningless noise for dey. Na only wit argumentation nai de idea of validity and truth dey emerge. Whetha or not something na true, false, or undecidable; whetha or not e don dey justified; wetin dey required in order to justify am; whetha me, somebody else, or no one dey right—all of dis gats dey decided for de course of argumentation and propositional exchanges. Dis proposition na a priori true, too, bcos e nor fit dey denied witout affirming am in de act of denying it. Person no fit argue say person nor fit argue, and person nor fit dispute knowing wetin e mean to raise a validity claim witout implicitly claiming at least de negation of dis proposition to dey true. Dis na de *a priori of argumentation*,[^33] and both axioms eh related as logically necessary interwoven strands of a priori knowledge. For one hand, actions dey more fundamental dan argumentation bcos argumentation na only a subclass of action. On de oda hand, to state wetin just dey stated about action a argumentation and dia relationship to each oda already require argumentation, so epistemologically argumentation gats dey considered to dey more fundamental dan nonargumentative action.

[^33]: Check in particular Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*, vol II.

Ethics, or more specifically, de Austrian private property ethic, dey derived from de a priori of argumentation, and na from its nature as a nonhypothetically true axiom that ethics derives its own status as absolutely true.[^34]

[^34]: See on the following Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chaps. 2, 7.

Wit de a priori of argumentation established as an axiomatic starting point of epistemology, e follow say anytin wey go dey presupposed for de act of proposition-making nor fit dey propositionally disputed again. E go dey meaningless to ask for  justification of presuppositions wey go make de production of meaningful propositions possible in de first place. Instead, dey gats dey regarded as ultimately justified by every proposition maker. Any specific propositional content wey dispute dia validity must dey understood as implying a performative or practical contradiction.

Further, in de same way as e dey undeniably true say person nor fit argue say person nor fit argue, and say e gats dey assume say  everybody wey dey engaged for argumentation gats know wetin e mean to claim sometin to be true, e also dey true say any argument go require an arguing person, an actor. Arguing nor dey just consist of free-floating propositions but na always activity, too. Given say truth claims gats dey raised and decided upon for de course of argumentation, and say argumentation, aside from wateva dem talk for e course na also practical affair, e follow say intersubjectively meaningful norms gat to exist. Dese norms dey precisely dose wey make an action argumentation, and dem get special cognitive status in dat dem be de practical preconditions of truth. In fact, neitha de empiricalfact/emotive-value dichotomy so dear to de positivists, nor dia distinction between empirical and analytical statements, fit dey  claimed to dey valid unless de norms underlying argumentation (for de course of wey dese distinctions dey made) dey demselves regarded as valid. E dey simply impossible to argue odawise bcos in doing so person go in fact presuppose dia validity.

Now, as a necessarily practical affair, any propositional exchange dey require a proposition-maker’s exclusive control (property) over some scarce means. Nobody fit possibly propose anytin, and nobody fit possibly become convinced of any proposition, if person right to make exclusive use of e physical body nor already dey presupposed. Na person recognition of anoda person mutually exclusive control over e body wey explain de distinctive characteristic of propositional exchanges: say while person fit disagree about wetin dem don talk, e still dey possible to agree at least for de fact say disagreement dey. E dey obvious, too, say dat kind  property right for person own body dem gat to talk am say e dey justified a priori, for anybody wey go try to justify any norm whatsoeva gats already presuppose exclusive right of control over e body simply to say, “I propose such and such.” Anybody wey dey dispute dat kind right go dey caught up for practical contradiction, since in arguing so person go already implicitly don accept de very norm say person dey dispute.

Last last, e go dey equally impossible to engage in argumentation, if man nor dey allowed to appropriate in addition to man body oda scarce means thru homesteading, i.e., by putting dem to use before someone else does, or if such means nor dey defined for objective, physical terms.

For if no one had the right to control anything at all, except his own body, then we would all cease to exist and the problem of justifying norms—as well as all other human problems—simply would not exist. The fact that one is alive presupposes the validity of property rights to other things. No one who is alive could argue otherwise.

And if a person did not acquire the right of exclusive control over such goods by homesteading, by establishing some objective link between a particular person and a particular physical resource before anyone else had done so, but instead late-comers were assumed to have ownership claims to things, then literally *no one would be allowed to do anything with anything at any time* unless he had the prior consent of all late-comers. Neither we nor our forefathers nor our progeny could survive or will survive if we were to follow this rule. Yet in order for any person—past, present or future—to argue anything it must evidently be possible to survive. And in order for us to do this, property rights cannot be conceived of as timeless and nonspecific regarding the number of people concerned. Rather, property rights must necessarily originate through action at definite places and times for specific acting individuals. Otherwise, it would be impossible for anyone to say anything at a definite tine and place and for someone else to reply. To assert that the first-user-first-owner rule of private property can be ignored or is unjustified implies a contradiction. One’s assertion of this proposition presupposes one’s existence as a physically independent decision-making unit at a given point in time, and the validity of the homesteading principle as an absolute principle of property acquisition.

Economics, or in Mises’s terminology praxeology, and its status as a nonhypothetical, a priori true social science is derived from the axiom of action.[^35]

[^35]: See on the following Mises, *Human Action*, chap. IV; Rothbard, *Man Economy, and State*, chap. 1; idem, “Praxeology: The Methodology of Austrian Economics,” in Edwin Dolan, ed., *The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science*; also Lionel Robbins, *The Nature and Significance of Economic Science* (New York: New York University Press, 1982).

With every action an actor pursues a goal, and whatever his goal may be, the fact that it is pursued by an actor reveals that he places a relatively higher value on it than on any other goal of action he could conceive of at the start of his action.

In order to achieve this goal an actor must interfere or decide not to interfere (which is also an interference) at an earlier point in time to produce a later result, and this interference implies the use of some scarce means (at least those of the actor’s body, its standing room, and the time used by the interference).

These means must also have value for an actor—a value derived from that of the goal—because the actor must regard their employment as necessary in order to achieve the goal effectively. Further, actions can only be performed sequentially and always involve making a choice, i.e., taking up one course of action which at some given point in time promises the most highly valued result to the actor and excluding at the same time the pursuit of other, less valued goals.

In addition, when acting an actor not only invariably aims to substitute a more for a less satisfactory state of affairs and demonstrates a preference for higher over lower values; he also invariably considers when in the future his goals will be reached and demonstrates a universal preference for earlier over later results. Since every action requires time and man must occasionally consume something, time is always scarce. Hence, present or earlier results are, and invariably must be, valued more highly than future or later ones, and man will only exchange a present value against a future one if he thereby anticipates *increasing* his future well-being.

Furthermore, as a consequence of having to choose and give preference to one goal over another, of not being able to realize all goals simultaneously, and of being constrained by time preference, each and every action implies the incurrence of costs, i.e., the forsaking of the value attached to the most highly valued alternative goal that cannot be realized or whose realization must be postponed because the means necessary to effect it are bound up in the production of another, even more highly valued goal.

Finally, it is implied in our knowledge of what it is to act, that at its starting point every goal of action must be considered worth more to the actor than its cost and capable of yielding a profit, i.e., a result whose value is ranked higher than that of the foregone opportunities. However, every action is also invariably threatened by the possibility of a loss if in retrospect an actor finds that contrary to expectations the result actually achieved has a lower value than the relinquished alternative would have had.

All of these categories which we know to be the very heart of economics—values, means, choice, preference, time preference, cost, profit and loss—are implied in the axiom of action. Like the axiom itself, they incorporate nonhypothetically true knowledge. Any attempt to disprove this knowledge would itself have to be an action, aimed at a goal, requiring means, excluding other courses of action, incurring costs, subjecting the actor to the possibility of achieving or not achieving the desired goal, and thus leading to a profit or a loss.

All true economic propositions, and this is what the Austrian conception of economics is all about, can be deduced by means of formal logic from this incontestably true material knowledge regarding the meaning of action and its categories. More precisely, all true economic theorems consist of: (a) an understanding of the meaning of action; (b) a situation or situational change—assumed to be given or identified as being given—and described in terms of action-categories; and (c) a logical deduction of the consequences—again in terms of such categories—which result for an actor from this situation or situational change. For instance, the law of marginal utility, one of the most basic laws of economics, follows from our indisputable knowledge of the fact that every actor always prefers what satisfies him more over what satisfies him less, plus the assumption that he is faced with an increase in the supply of a good (a scarce means) whose units he regards as of equal serviceability by one additional unit. From this it follows with logical necessity that this additional unit can only be employed as a means for the removal of an uneasiness that is deemed less urgent than the least valuable goal previously satisfied by a unit of such a good.

The combination of ethics as implied in the axiom of argumentation and of economics as implied in that of action yields what might be called Austrian welfare economics.[^36]

[^36]: See also Murray N. Rothbard, *Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series no. 3, 1977); idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed, Andrews and McMeel, 1977); idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* 1, no. 2 (1981); Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*; idem, “*Man, Economy, and Liberty*: Review Essay,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 4 (1990).

If and insofar as actors choose to act in accordance with the indisputably valid principle of the private property ethic, social welfare—defined in terms of Pareto-optimality—will invariably be optimized: A person’s original appropriation of unowned resources, as demonstrated by this very action, increases his utility or welfare (at least *ex ante*). At the same time, it makes no one worse off because in appropriating them he takes nothing away from others. Obviously, others could have homesteaded these resources, too, if only they had perceived them as scarce, and hence, valuable. However, they did not do so, which demonstrates that they attached no value to them whatsoever, and thus they cannot be said to have lost any utility on account of this act. Proceeding from this basis, any further act of production utilizing homesteaded resources is equally Pareto-optimal on demonstrated preference grounds, provided only that it does not uninvitedly impair the physical integrity of the resources homesteaded or produced with homesteaded means by others. Finally, every voluntary exchange starting from this basis must also be regarded as a Paretooptimal change because it can only take place if both parties expect to benefit from it.

Operating according to the rules just described always, and invariably so, leads to the greatest possible production of wealth, for any deviation from this set of rules implies, by definition, a redistribution of property titles, and hence of income, away from user-producers and contractors of goods onto non-users-producers and noncontractors. Consequently, any such deviation implies that there will be relatively less original appropriation of resources whose scarcity is recognized, there will be less production of new goods, less maintenance of existing goods, and less mutually beneficial contracting and trading. This in turn implies a lower standard of living in terms of exchangeable goods and services. Furthermore, the provision that only the *first* user of a good acquires ownership assures that productive efforts will be as high as possible *at all times*. The provision that only the physical integrity of property (not property values) is protected guarantees that every owner will undertake the greatest possible *value*-productive efforts to promote favorable changes in property values and to prevent or counter any unfavorable changes in property values (as they might result from another person’s actions regarding his property). Thus, any deviation from these rules also implies reduced levels of value productive efforts at all times.

The radical simplicity of this Austrian theory of ethics and economics, indeed the fact that it has been fully elaborated—foremost in Ludwig von Mises’s epochal *Human Action*, and in Murray N. Rothbard’s *Man, Economy, and State* and *The Ethics of Liberty*—to a rigorously consistent as well as architectonically beautiful edifice of ethical and economic thought explains why the social rationalism of the Austrian School could be driven underground during the heyday of positivism but could never be entirely uprooted and eradicated. Its truth is too obvious to be consistently ignored among men of intellectual curiosity and common sense, for is it not natural that every person should own his own body as well as all scarce goods which he puts to use with the help of this body before anyone else does? Is it not obvious that every owner should have the right to employ these goods as he sees fit so long as in so doing he does not uninvitedly change the physical integrity of another’s property? Is it not obvious that once a good has first been homesteaded or produced with homesteaded means, then ownership of it can only be acquired by means of a contractual, voluntary transfer of a property title from a previous to a later owner? And is it not intuitively clear that only if, and insofar as, these rules are in effect, the greatest possible production of social wealth and welfare will ensue?[^37]

[^37]: See on the idea of a natural sense of justice also Gustave de Molinari, *The Production of Security* (Burlingame, Calif.: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 2, 1977).

This so obviously true theory has the most radical practical-political implications. It refutes as ethically unjustifiable and economically counterproductive actions such as taxation, the legislative redistribution of private property rights, the creation of fiat money, fractional reserve banking, and ultimately, the very institution of state government. It demands instead a pure private property society, an anarchy of private property owners, regulated exclusively by private property law.[^38] By virtue of this, the Austrian School is brought into fundamental opposition to any exercise of governmental power. Recognizing it as their natural and most dangerous intellectual enemy, those in power have done everything possible to stamp out its memory and substitute statolatry for ethics and economics. As Mises writes:

[^38]: On this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*; idem, *Power and Market*, idem, *For A New Liberty*; idem, *The Ethics of Liberty*; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); idem, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*.

> Despots and democratic majorities are drunk with power. They must reluctantly admit that they are subject to the laws of nature. But they reject the very notion of economic law. Are they not the supreme legislator? ...It is impossible to understand the history of economic thought if one does not pay attention to the fact that economics as such is a challenge to the conceit of those in power. An economist can never be a favorite of autocrats and demagogues. With them he is always the mischief-maker, and the more they are inwardly convinced that his objections are well founded, the more they hate him.[^39]

[^39]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 67.

In the present situation of a worldwide crisis of governmental legitimacy, of the collapse of East Bloc Socialism, and of the enduring stagnation of the Western Welfare States, the chance for Austrian rationalism to fill the philosophical vacuum that has appeared with the retreat of positivism and to become the paradigm of the future is as good or better than ever.[^40] Now as before it requires moral courage as much as intellectual integrity to propound the Austrian social theory—the opposing statist battalions still represent a formidable majority and are in control of a far larger share of resources. Nonetheless, with the total breakdown of socialism and the concept of social ownership staring everyone in the face, the antithetical Austrian theory of private property, free markets and laissez faire cannot but gain attractiveness and win support. Austrians have reason to believe that the time has come when they may succeed in bringing about a fundamental change in public opinion, by reclaiming ethics and economics from the hands of the positivists and the engineering powerful and by restoring public recognition of private property rights and free markets based on such rights as ultimate, absolute principles of ethics and economics.

[^40]: For a strategic assessment of the present age from an Austrian perspective see Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right: The Prospects for Liberty,” and “Ludwig von Mises and the Paradigm of Our Age,” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974).
