Third, any body wey don see state-run police station and court dem, no be to mention prison dem join, go know say true true na factor of production wey dem dey use provide people with dat kind security wey dem dey over use, as dem dey maintain am badly, and filthy too. Since no body dey use these factors of production wey actually own dem (no body fit sell dem and get mind mind write receipt from wetin dem sell) and d losses (and d gains) wey d value carry for bodi for d capital we dem take one kind socialized, everybodi go wan to increase him private income wey go result from d way him use the factors at d expense say make loss no dey for the capital value. For dis reason, marginal cost go increase sote e go wan exceed d value of d marginal product, and over use of d capital go show result. And if, for matter wey no common, dis tin wey dey happen no suppose to dey happen so and make over utilization not dey show for people to see, den dis don only dey possible for price we dey high than dat of oda private business wey dey around.

Without no doubt, all dis problems dey natural for one system wey be monopolistic security production wey go solve tins sharp sharp once dem give am demand for security services wey meet odas competitive market wey entirely get different incentives structure for producers. Dis no be to cum say one "perfect" solution to d problem of security say dem go find am. There go still be tif tif and people wey dey kill: and no be every money wey people tif dem go fit recover abi catch people wey dey kill people. But for de terms of consumers evaluations d situation go improve to de extent say de nature of man go allow am to improve. First, as long say dem get competitive system (i.e., as long say people wey dey create security services dey depend on voluntary buying, most time e dey take d form of services and insurance contracts with agreement in advance of any tin wey go happen base on insecurity or aggression), no producer go wan increase im income unless im go first improve service or d quality of im product as d costumer take perceive am. Furthermore, all d security producers if packed together sef no fit get big importance of dis particular industry unless, for any reason dem get, their consumers go indeed start to dey evaluate their security say e high beta dan dat of odas, so e go beta say d production of their security go never take place base on de expense of de non-or d reduced production of, make we say, cheese, as one competitive private good. To add join, d producer of d security services go need to diversify their to wetin dem dey offer to a very considerable degree unto say high diversified demand for security products among millions and millions of consumers don already dey. Na to directly dey dependent on voluntary consumer support, dem go quick quick dey pain financially if dem no respond to their consumer on wetin dem need or change wetin dem need. For dis matter every consumer go need get one direct influence, weda e small, on top d output of goods we dey appear or disappear from de security market. Instead of to dey offer uniform "security packet" to every bodi, as one characteristic wey be state production policy, one multitude of service packages go appear for market. Dem go attend to d different security need for different people, dem go take account of different work, different behavior wey pertain risk taking, dey need different kind of protection and for insurance, and different kind of geographical location and time constraints.

But dat one far from all. Aside say diversification dey, d content and quality of d products go improve wella. No be only say de treatment of de consumers by those wey employ de security enterprises go improve sharp sharp, de " i fit no even care at all" attitude, de individual judgment and even brutality, de negligence and tardiness of de present police dem and d judicial system go just disappear first. Since policemen and dem judges go dey dependent on voluntary consumer support, any sign of maltreatment of consumers, of rudeness or d to no do sumtin fit cost dem their jod. Furthermore, de unusual tin wey dey settle argument between one client and im business partner na d every time trust to de latter's judgment, wey go almost disappear from de books, and e go cause gbege unto judgment by independent parties wey go become de standard wey producers of security offer. Most importantly, for dem to attract and keep their customers de producer wey dey give such services go need to offer contracts wey go allow consumers to know wetin him dey buy and go enable am to raise one valid, to establishment and discover complaint if de actual performance of de security producer no live up to de contract. More specifically, in as much as dey no dey individualized service contract where customer dey make payment to cover im own risk but go rather insure contracts wey require pooling person own risk with those other people, opposite to wetin d present statist practice wey dis contracts mostly no go wan contain any careful built-in d act of changing scheme to favor one group of people at de expense of anoda. Otherwise, if anybodi get don get d feelin say de contracts wey dem offer to am go require make im pay oda people unsual needs and risk-factor wey dey possible say security no dey, wey be im no perceive as as im own case-im go need just reject to sign am or to just stop to dey make payment.

Even after dem don yarn all dis, de question go still showface. "E for beta if one competitive system for security production dey compulsory dey result into permanent social conflict, wey be chaos and anarchy? Many response fit make dis question. First, dem need notice am say such show body no go by any means dey in accordance with historical, based on experience get get evidence. Systems wey dem dey use compete for courts don dey exist for many places before (e.g., for ancient Ireland or for d time of de Hanseatic League) before de arrival of de modern nations state, and as far we know dem work wella. Dem Judge dem den by crime rate wey don dey exist before (crime per capita), de private police for dis so -called Wild West (wey incidentally before dem no wild as some film dey talk) dem been relate say dem dey more successful dan today's state - supported police). And after e don turn to contemporary experience and examples, millions and millions of international contracts still dey exist till now-contracts of trade and travel-and and e come be wetin dem don too talk say, for example, say wayo wayo done many, crime don many, many breach of contract dey there dan for domestic relations. And dis, make dem take note say, without say one big monopolistic security producer and lawmaker. Finally it is not to be forgotten that even now in a great number of countries there are various private security producers alongside the state: private investigators, insurance detectives, and private arbitrators. Their work seems to confirm the thesis that they are more, not less, successful in resolving social conflicts than their public counterparts.

However, this historical evidence is very much subject to dispute, in particular regarding whether any general information can be derived from it. Yet there are systematic reasons, too, why the fear expressed by the question is not well-founded. Paradoxical as it may seem, establishing a competitive system of security producers implies erecting an institutionalized incentive structure to produce an order of law and law-enforcement that embodies the highest possible degree of consensus regarding the question of conflict resolution. Such a structure will tend to generate less rather than more social unrest and conflict than would occur under monopolistic auspices.[^29] In order to understand this paradox, it is necessary to take a closer look at the only typical situation that concerns the skeptic and that allows him to believe in the superior virtue of a monopolistically organized order of security production: when a conflict arises between A and B, both are insured by different companies and the companies cannot come to an immediate agreement regarding the validity of the conflicting claims brought forward by their respective clients. (No problem would exist if such an agreement were reached or if both clients were insured by one and the same company—at least the problem then would not be different in any way from that emerging under a statist monopoly.) Would not such a situation always result in a shoot-out? This is highly unlikely. First, any violent battle between companies would be costly and risky, in particular if these companies had reached a respectable size (which would be important for them to have in order to appear as effective guarantors of security to their prospective clients in the first place). More importantly, under a competitive system with each company dependent on the continuation of voluntary consumer payments, any battle would have to be deliberately supported by each and every client of both companies. If there were only one person who withdrew his payments because he was not convinced a battle was necessary in the particular conflict at hand, there would be immediate economic pressure on the company to look for a peaceful solution to the conflict.[^30] Hence any competitive producer of security would be extremely cautious about engaging in violent measures in order to resolve conflicts. Rather, to the extent that it is peaceful conflict resolution that consumers want, each and every security producer would go to great lengths to provide it to its clients and to establish in advance, for everyone to know, to what arbitration process it would be willing to submit itself and its clients in case of a disagreement over the evaluation of conflicting claims. And as such a scheme could appear to the clients of different firms to be working only if there were agreement among them regarding such arbitrational measures, a system of law governing relations between companies that would be universally acceptable to the clients of all of the competing security producers would naturally evolve. Moreover, the economic pressure to generate rules representing a consensus on how conflicts should be handled is even more farreaching. Under a competitive system, the independent arbitrators who would be entrusted with the task of finding peaceful solutions to conflicts would be dependent on the continued support of the two disputing companies insofar as the companies could and would select different judges if either one of them were sufficiently dissatisfied with the outcome of the arbitration work. Thus, these judges would be under pressure to find solutions to the problems handed over to them that, this time not with respect to the procedural aspects of law but its content, would be acceptable to all of the clients of the firms involved.[^31] Otherwise one or all of the companies might lose customers, thus inducing those firms to turn to different arbitrators the next time they are in need of one.[^32]

But wouldn’t it be possible under a competitive system for a security producing firm to become an outlaw company—a firm, that is, which, supported by its own clients, started aggressing against others? There is certainly no way to deny that this might be possible, though again it must be emphasized that here one is in the realm of empirical social science and no one could know such a thing with certainty. And yet the tacit implication that the possibility that a security firm could become an outlaw company somehow indicates a severe deficiency in the philosophy and economics of a pure capitalist social order is fallacious.[^33]

First, it should be recalled that any social system, a statist-socialist order no less than a pure market economy, is dependent for its continued existence on public opinion and that a given state of public opinion at all times delimits what can or cannot occur as well as what is more or less likely to occur. The current state of public opinion in West Germany, for instance, makes it highly unlikely or even impossible that a statist-socialist system of the current Soviet type could be imposed on the West German public. The lack of public support for such a system would doom it to failure and make it collapse. It is even more unlikely that any attempt to impose a Soviet-type order could ever hope to succeed among Americans, given American public opinion. Hence, in order for us to see the problem of outlaw companies correctly, the above question should be phrased as follows: How likely is it that any such event would occur in a given society with its specific state of public opinion? Formulated in this way, it is clear that the answer would have to be different for different societies. For some, characterized by socialist ideas deeply entrenched in the public, there would be a greater likelihood of the reemergence of aggressor companies, and for other societies there would be a much smaller chance of this happening. But then, would the prospect of a competitive system of security production in any given case be better or worse than that of the continuation of a statist system? Let us look, for instance, at the present-day United States. Assume that by a legislative act the state had abolished its right to provide security with tax funds and a competitive system of security production was introduced. Given the state of public opinion, how likely then would it be that outlaw producers would spring up, and what if they did? Evidently, the answer would depend on the reactions of the public to this changed situation. Thus, the first reply to those challenging the idea of a private market for security would have to be: What about you? What would your reaction be? Does your fear of outlaw companies mean that you would then go out and engage in trade with a security producer that aggressed against other people and their property, and would you continue supporting it if it did? Certainly the critic would be much muted by this counterattack. But more important than this is the systematic challenge implied in this personal counterattack. Evidently, the described change in the situation would imply a change in the cost-benefit structure that everyone would face once he had to make his decisions. Before the introduction of a competitive system of security production, it had been legal to participate in and support (state) aggression. Now such an activity would be illegal. Hence, given one’s conscience, which makes each decision appear more or less costly (i.e., more or less in harmony with one’s own principles of correct behavior), support for a firm engaging in the exploitation of people unwilling to deliberately support its actions would be more costly than before. Given this fact, it must be assumed that the number of people (including even those who otherwise would have readily lent their support to the state) who would now spend their money to support a firm committed to honest business would rise wherever this social experiment was tried. In contrast, the number of people still committed to a policy of exploitation—of gaining at the expense of others—would fall. How drastic this effect would be would of course depend on the state of public opinion. In the example at hand—the United States, where the natural theory of property is extremely widespread and accepted as a private ethic, the libertarian philosophy being essentially the ideology on which the country was founded and that led it to the height it reached[^34]—the effect would naturally be particularly pronounced. Accordingly, security producing firms committed to the philosophy of protecting and enforcing libertarian law would attract the greatest bulk of public support and financial assistance. And while it may be true that some people, and among them especially those who have profited from the old order, might continue their support of a policy of aggression, it is very unlikely that they would be sufficient in number and financial strength to succeed in doing so. Rather, the likely outcome would be that the honest companies would develop the strength needed—alone or in a combined effort and supported in this effort by their own voluntary customers—to check any such emergence of outlaw producers and destroy them wherever and whenever they came into existence.[^35]

[^26]: Sums up Molinari, *Production of Security*, pp. 13–14,

::::> If … the consumer is not free to buy security wherever he pleases, you forthwith see open up a large profession dedicated to arbitrariness and bad management. Justice becomes slow and costly, the police vexatious, individual liberty is no longer respected, the price of security is abusively inflated and inequitably apportioned, according to the power and influence of this or that class of consumers.

[^27]: See the literature cited in note 22; also Bruno Leoni, *Freedom and the Law* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1961); Joseph Peden, “Property Rights in Celtic Irish Law”, *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977).

[^28]: See Terry L. Anderson and Peter J. Hill, “The American Experiment in Anarcho-Capitalism: The *Not* So Wild, Wild West”, *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 1 (1980).

[^29]: On the following, see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1986), chap. 5.

[^30]: Contrast this with the state’s policy of engaging in battles without having everyone’s deliberate support because it has the right to tax people; and ask yourself if the risk of war would be lower or higher if one had the right to stop paying taxes as soon as one had the feeling that the states’ handling of foreign affairs was not to one’s liking.

[^31]: And it may be noted here again that norms that incorporate the highest possible degrees of consensus are, of course, those that are presupposed by argumentation and whose acceptance makes consensus on anything at all possible, as indicated above.

[^32]: Again, contrast this with state-employed judges who, because they are paid from taxes and so are relatively independent of consumer satisfaction, can pass judgments that are clearly not acceptable as fair by everyone; and ask yourself if the risk of not finding the truth in a given case would be lower or higher if one had the possibility of exerting economic pressure whenever one had the feeling that a judge who one day might have to adjudicate in one’s own case had not been sufficiently careful in assembling and judging the facts of a case, or simply was an outright crook.

[^33]: See on the following in particular Rothbard, *For A New Liberty*, pp. 233ff.

[^34]: See Bernard Bailyn, *The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); Jackson Turner Main, *The Anti-Federalists: Critics of the Constitution* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1961); Murray N. Rothbard, *Conceived in Liberty* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1975–1979).

[^35]: Naturally, insurance companies would assume a particularly important role in checking the emergence of outlaw companies. Note Morris and Linda Tannehill (*The Market of Liberty*, pp. 110–11):

::::> Insurance companies, a very important sector of any totally free economy, would have a special incentive to dissociate themselves from any aggressor and, in addition, to bring all their considerable business influence to bear against him. *Aggressive violence causes value loss*, and the insurance industry would suffer the major cost in most such value losses. An unrestrained aggressor is a walking liability, and no insurance company, however remotely removed from his original aggression, would wish to sustain the risk that he might aggress against one of its own clients next. Besides, aggressors and those who associate with them are more likely to be involved in situations of violence and are, thus, bad insurance risks. An insurance company would probably refuse coverage to such people out of a foresighted desire to minimize any future losses which their aggression might cause. But even if the company were not motivated by such foresight, it would still be forced to rate their premiums up drastically or cancel their coverage altogether in order to avoid carrying the extra risk invoked in their inclination to violence. In a competitive economy, no insurance company could afford to continue covering aggressors and those who had dealings with aggressors and simply pass the cost on to its honest customers; it would soon lose these customers to more reputable firms which could afford to charge less for their insurance coverage.