## Socialism: A Property or Knowledge Problem?

### 

In a series of recent articles in the *Review of Austrian Economics*, Joseph Salerno began to de-homogenize the often conflated economic and social theories of Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich A. Hayek. In particular, he has shown that their views on socialism are distinctly different, and he has argued in effect that Mises’s original argument in the so-called socialist calculation debate was correct all along and was also the final word, whereas Hayek’s distinct contribution to the debate was fallacious from the outset and merely added confusion. The following note will provide additional support to Salerno’s thesis.

Mises’s well-known calculation argument states this: If there is no private property in land and other production factors, then there can also be no market prices for them. Hence, economic calculation, i.e., the comparison of anticipated revenue and expected cost expressed in terms of a common medium of exchange (which permits *cardinal* accounting operations), is literally impossible. Socialism’s fatal error is the absence of private property in land and production factors, and by implication, the absence of economic calculation.

For Hayek, socialism’s problem is not a lack of property but a lack of knowledge. His distinctive thesis is altogether different from Mises’s.[^1] For Hayek, the ultimate flaw of socialism is the fact that knowledge, in particular “the knowledge of the particular circumstances of time and place”, exists only in a widely dispersed form as the personal possession of various individuals; hence, it is *practically* impossible to assemble and process all the actually existing knowledge within the mind of a single socialist central planner. Hayek’s solution is not private property, but the decentralization of the use of knowledge.

Yet this is surely an absurd thesis. First, if the centralized use of knowledge is the problem, then it is difficult to explain why there are families, clubs, and firms, and why they do not face the very same problems as socialism. Families and firms also involve central planning. The family head and the owner of the firm also make plans which bind the use other people can make of their private knowledge, yet families and firms are not known to share the problems of socialism. For Mises, this observation poses no difficulty: under socialism private property is *absent*, whereas individual families and private firms are *based* on the very *institution* of private property. However, for Hayek the smooth operation of families and firms is puzzling because his idea of a fully decentralized society is one in which each person makes his own decisions based on his own unique knowledge ofthe circumstances, unconstrained by any central plan or supraindividual (social) norm (such as the institution of private property).

Second, if the *desideratum* is merely the decentralized use of knowledge in society, then it is difficult to explain why the problems of socialism are fundamentally different from those encountered by any other form of social organization. *Every* human organization, composed as it is of distinct individuals, constantly and unavoidably makes use of decentralized knowledge. In socialism, decentralized knowledge is utilized no less than in private firms or households. As in a firm, a central plan exists under socialism, and within the constraints of this plan, the socialist workers and the firm’s employees utilize their own decentralized knowledge of circumstances of time and place to implement and execute the plan. For Mises, all of this is completely beside the point. Within Hayek’s analytical framework, no difference between socialism and a private corporation exists. Hence, there can be no more wrong with socialism than with a private firm.

Clearly, Hayek’s thesis regarding the central problem of socialism is nonsensical. What categorically distinguishes socialism from firms and families is *not* the existence of centralized knowledge or the lack of the use of decentralized knowledge, but rather the absence of private property, and hence, of prices. In fact, in occasional references to Mises and his original calculation argument, Hayek at times appears to realize this, too. But his attempt to integrate his very own thesis with Mises’s and thereby provide a new and higher theoretical synthesis fails.

The Hayekian synthesis consists of the following propositional conjunction: “Fundamentally, in a system in which the knowledge of the relevant facts is dispersed among many people, prices can act to coordinate the separate actions of different people” and “the price system” can serve as “a mechanism for communicating information”.[^2] While the second part of this proposition strikes one as vaguely Misesian, it is anything but clear how it is logically related to the first, except through Hayek’s elusive association of “prices” with “information” and “knowledge”. However, this association is more of a semantic trick than rigorous argumentation. On one hand, it is harmless to speak of prices as conveying information. They inform about past exchange ratios, but it is a non-sequitur to conclude that socialism’s central problem is a lack of *knowledge*. This would only follow if prices actually *were* information. However, this is not the case. Prices convey knowledge, but they are the exchange ratios of various goods, which result from the voluntary interactions of distinct individuals *based on the institution of private property*. Without the institution of private property, the information conveyed by prices simply does not exist. Private property is the necessary condition—*die Bedingung der Möglichkeit*—of the knowledge communicated through prices. Yet then it is only correct to conclude, as Mises does, that it is the absence of the institution of private property which constitutes socialism’s problem. To claim that the problem is a lack of knowledge, as Hayek does, is to confuse cause and effect, or premise and consequence.

On the other hand, Hayek’s identification of “prices” and “knowledge” involves a deceptive equivocation. Not only does Hayek fail to distinguish between what one might call institutional knowledge—information that requires for its existence an institution (such as the knowledge of prices requires private property)—and *raw or extra-institutional knowledge*—such as this is an oak tree, I like peanuts, or birds can fly. Moreover, Hayek fails to notice that the knowledge of prices is not at all the same sort of knowledge whose existence he believes to be responsible for the “practical impossibility” of socialism and central planning. What makes central planning impossible, according to Hayek, is the fact that part of human knowledge exists only as essentially *private* information:

> practically every individual has some advantage over all others because he possesses unique information of which beneficial use might be made, but of which use can be made only if the decisions depending on it are left to him or are made with his active co-operation.[^3]

While e dey certainly true say dis kind knowledge exists, and while e dey also true say uniquely private knowledge fit never be centralized (without information losses), e just certainl no be true say de knowledge of prices falls inside dis category of uniquely private information. To dey sure, prices na “prices paid for specific times and places”, but dis no make dem private information for de Hayekian sense. To de contrary, de information conveyed by prices na public information, becus prices—qua objective exchange ratios—dey real events. E fit be difficult to know all of de prices paid for specified date and location, just as e fit be difficult to know every person physical location at any given time. Yet e go hardly impossible to know either one, and with current computer technology e go probably easy. In any case, while I fit never know everything wey you know, and vice versa, e no dey  more problematic to assume say both of us fit simultaneously get de same price information dan dat we fit both simultaneously know de same baseball results. Hence, de knowledge conveyed by prices actually fit be centralized. However, if price information na public information and thus fit be centralized, den, according to Hayek’s thesis say socialism’s problem stems from de inefficiency of trying to centralize genuinely uncentralizable private knowledge, e go follow dat de absence of prices, and hence of private property get nothing to do with de plight of socialism. Odawise, if person insists wit Mises say de absence of private property, and prices come get something to do with de plight of socialism, Hayek’s contribution to de socialism debate must be discarded as false, confusing, and irrelevant.

Hayek’s misconception of de nature of socialism na symptomatic of a fundamental flaw for im tinkin, pervading no be only im economic but in particular also im political philosophy: im ultra-subjectivism. Hayek, don take note and quote ad nauseam by im numerous followers, dey convinced say “e probably no exaggeration to say dat every important advance in economic theory during de last hundred years na further step in de consistent application of subjectivism”.[^4] While dis fit be true, e no logically follow say every further advance toward subjectivism must also lead to an advance for economic theory. Howeva, Hayek seems to get drawn dis conclusion and done thus become a prime example illustrating im falsehood.

Mises, and for him steps even more clearly Murray N. Rothbard, conceives of economics as de science of human action. Action get two inseparable aspects: a subjective aspect (action is rational, intelligible action) and an objective aspect (acting na always acting wit real tins and physical stuff). Accordingly, Mises’s and Rothbard’s economics and political philosophy is neva anyting but robust, and dia categories and theories invariably possess real, operational meaning: private property, division of labor based on private property, production, direct and indirect exchange, and compulsory interference wit private property and production and exchange like taxation, counterfeiting, legislation, and regulation.

For distinct contrast, Hayek—and misled by im to different degrees also Israel Kirzner and Ludwig Lachmann—views economics as some sort of science of human knowledge. Accordingly, Hayek’s categories and theories refer to purely subjective phenomena and are invariably elusive or even illusory. He no dey concerned about acting wit tins but about knowledge and ignorance, de division, dispersion, and diffusion of knowledge, alertness, discovery, learning, and de coordination and divergence of plans and expectations. De external (physical) world and real (material) events get almost completely disappeared from im view. Hayek’s categories refer to mental states of affairs and relationships, completely detached from and compatible wit any real physical state of affairs and events.

Most notable and disturbing na de ultra-subjectivist turn in Hayek’s political philosophy. According to long-standing tradition of political philosophy shared by Mises and Rothbard, freedom dey defined as de freedom to privately own and control real property, and coercion na de initiation of physical damage upon de private property of odas. In distinct contrast, Hayek define freedom as “a state for wich each person fit use im own knowledge and for him own purposes”,[^5] and coercion means “such control of de environment or circumstances of de person by anoda dat, make we for avoid greater evil, dem forced am to act not according to a coherent plan of him own but to serve de ends of anoda”,[^6] or alternatively, “coercion occurs when one person actions dem make am to serve anoda person will, not for im own but for de oda’s purpose”[^7] (all emphases mine). Clearly, Hayek’s definition contains no reference to scarce goods and real tangible property, and provides no physical criterion or indicator whatsoeva for de existence or nonexistence of either state of affairs. Rather coercion and freedom refer to specific configurations of subjective wills, plans, thoughts, or expectations. As mental predicates, Hayek’s definitions of freedom and coercion are compatible wit every real, physical state of affairs.[^8]

E dey beyond de scope of dis note to offer a detailed critique and refutation of Hayek’s ultra-subjectivism. Howeva, in addition to de fundamental question weda a science of knowledge as envisioned by Hayek dey even possible (i.e., weda there fit be any oda science of knowledge apart from logic and epistemology on de one hand and de history of ideas on de oda),[^9] two conclusions dey painfully clear. Even if Hayek’s science of knowledge dey possible, e appears for best irrelevant becus e dey praxeologically meaningless. At worst e dey intellectually pernicious in promoting relativism.

As for de real world of acting wit physical property, of production and exchange, of money and markets, of profits and losses, of capital accumulation and of bankruptcies, lasting doubt fit no day about de existence of laws and de ceaseless operation of tendency toward general equilibrium (action-coordination). Likewise, doubt fit no dey about de existence of laws and de constant operation of dis-equilibrating tendencies witin de world of actual taxation, counterfeiting, legislation, and regulation. Indeed, e go dey extremely costly, even prohibitive, not to recognize such laws and tendencies and to adopt relativistic views. In contrast, for surreptitiously shifting attention from de tangible world of action and property to de ethereal world of knowledge, ideas, plans and expectations, relativistic views becom attractive and cheap. Regularities apparent no dey and tendencies in Hayek’s knowledge world. In fact, e dey difficult to even imagine watin “law” and “equilibrium” go possibly mean in de context of purely subjective phenomena. Instead there appears to exist notin but constant kaleidoscopic change.

E dey hardly surprising den dat Hayek and im followers fit proclaim such relativistic slogans as dat we no fit do anything to improve our condition except rely on spontaneous evolution, dat our future dey completely unknowable, or dat we no fit but participate in an endless and open-ended stream of conversation. As far as de realm of purely subjective phenomena dey concerned and addressed to a purely spiritual disembodied being, dis fit be well good advice. However, why anyone wit bodily existence even care? As applied to de world of bodily action and property, such advice na self-destructive nonsense.

[^1]: See in particular de widely acclaimed 1945 article, “De Use of Knowledge in Society”, reprinted in F.A. Hayek, Individualism and Economic Order (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948).

[^2]: Ibid., pp. 85–86.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 80.

[^4]: F.A. Hayek, De Counterrevolution of Science (New York: Free Press, 1955), p. 21.

[^5]: F.A. Hayek, *Law, Legislation, and Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973), vol. 1, pp. 55–56.

[^6]: F.A. Hayek, De Constitution of Liberty (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), pp. 20–21.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 133.

[^8]: See also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Hayek on Government and Social Evolution”, *Review of Austrian Economics* 7, no. 1 (1994): esp. 70ff.

[^9]: For some serious doubts on this see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1983).
