For dia attempt to rebut dis argument, Selgin and White first concede de central theoretical point: “We agree say time preference and money demand dey distinct, and say change for person no imply change for de oda”.[^39] Likewise:

> [s]ay holding money na one form of saving no imply say increase for de demand for money dey identically increase for total saving. Increased in demand for money fit accompany a reduced demand for holding oda assets, and not reduction in consumption; hence e fit be part of de change for de manner of saving with no change for total savings.[^40]

Howeva, if increased dey for demand money no fit identically increase for total savings, den e dey impossible to maintain say e provides for a larger pool of loanable money and increased capital formation (a lengthening of de structure of production). Hence, to rescue dia economic-growth thesis, immediately following dis concession Selgin and White try to take am back again by arguing dat:

> Nonedeless [de nonidentity of time preference and money demand notwithstanding] to hold money na to hold am for later spending, even though how much later e no signalled (and typically im neva decid by de money-holder). Holding money for later spending, rada dan spending am on consumption now, e dey defer consuming to de future. As Hoppe himself point out, de demand for cash stems from de convenience e allows person for purchasing “consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates”. So perhaps our disagreement here na merely over words.[^41]

Unfortunately, dis suggestion dey unfounded. Rather dan a verbal quibble, de disagreement dey substantive one concerning de nature of money.

E dey difficult not to interpret de two previous pronouncements as contradictory. Selgin and White try to escape from dis conclusion by ad hoc semantic shift, dat is, for characterizing money as future good. Essentially, dia argument na say while increased money demand no imply increase savings, e provides nonetheless for a larger loan money, becus money dey held only to be spent “at uncertain future dates” (dia emphasis), such say an increased demand for money dey always and at de same time an increase in de demand for future goods.[^42] Yet money dey demonstrably not a future good. In fact, when de money is spent—in de future—e loses all im utility for de present owner. E get utility only while and insofar as dem no spend am, and e character as a present good stems from de omnipresent human condition of uncertainty.[^43]

De error for classifying money as a future good fit revealed for twofold manner. For one hand, negatively, e fit see am say dis assumption still leads to contradiction. For support of dia thesis, Selgin and White claim say “holding money for later spending, rad dan spending am on consumption now, no defer from consumption for de future”, implying say de holding of money involves de exchange of a future good (satisfaction) for a present one. For de next sentence dem admit say money wey dem hold dem spend am neither on consumer goods nor or producer goods. Yet dem fail to notice say dis implies also, as a further consequence, say holding money for later spending, rada dan spending am on production now, no defer from production (and hence future consumption) to de future. If de holding of money defers consumption and production, howeva, den e becomes impossible to maintain say de holder of money done thereby invested for de future good, becus dem no get future goods—whether consumer or producer goods—which result from de act of holding money and to which de holder fit thus be entitled. Yet as claims to no future goods whatsoeva, money fit be worthless. By implication, if money no dey worthless (and no bodi go hold money if e no get value), den im value must be dat of a present good.

On de oda hand, positively, de nature of money as a paradigmatically present good fit be established by praxeological proof. As Mises and Rothbard done explained, for general equilibrium or, more appropriately, within de imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy, no money exists. With all uncertainties by assumption removed, everyone fit know precisely de terms, times, and locations of all future exchanges, and all exchanges fit be prearranged accordingly and take de form of direct rada dan indirect exchanges.

> For system wey no get change for where no uncertainty whateva about de future, nobody needs to hold money. Every bodi know precisely watin amount of money im go need for any future date. Im go therefore in a position to borrow all de money im receives for such way say de loans fall due on ce date im go need them.[^44]

While dem no get place for money for de construction of evenly rotating economy, howeva, there exists within im framework a present and a future, now and later, de beginning of action and im later complete, immediately serviceable consumer goods (present goods) and indirectly serviceable producer goods (future goods), de structure of production, and savings and investment, dat is, exchange of present against future goods governed by time preference. If anything, dis go prove again say money and de demand for money dey systematically unrelated to consumption, production, and time preference, and say de source of tde utility of money must be categorically different one from dat of consumer goods and producer goods. De source of fe utility of a consumer good dey direct and present serviceability, and tde source of de utility of a producer good dey indirect future serviceability. Money, by contrast, na neither consumed nor employed for production. Na neither directly serviceable (as consumer goods are) nor indirectly useful as a way station to future consumer goods (as producer goods are). Rada, de utility of money must be dat of an indirectly yet presently serviceable good.

Outside de imaginary construction of evenly rotating economy, under de inescapable human condition of uncertainty, wen de terms, times, and locations of all future exchanges not fit be predicted wit certitude, and wen action dey by nature speculative and subject to error, man fot conceivably demand goods no longer exclusively on account of dia use-value (present or future), but also becus of dia value as media of exchange (for resale purposes). Faced wit situations where, due to de absence of double coincidences of wants, direct exchange dey impossible, man fit evaluate goods also on account of dia degree of marketability, and fit consider trading wheneva a good to be acquired dey more marketable dan dat to be surrendered, such dat im possession go facilitate de acquisition of directly or indirectly serviceable goods and services. Moreover, becus na de sole function of a medium of exchange to facilitate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable goods, man go naturally prefer de acquisition of a more marketable and, for de limit, universally marketable medium of exchange to dat of a less or nonuniversally marketable one, such dat

> [I]nevitable tendency go dey for de less marketable of different goods used like media of exchange e go be one by one rejected until at last only one single commodity remain, wey na universally employed as a medium of exchange; for inside word, money.[^45]

Selgin and White dey familiar wit dis Mengerian-Misesian reconstruction of monetary evolution, of course. Dem apparently fail to recognize, howeva, say dis feature of money as de most easily and widely salable commodity dey far from rendering am to future good, qualifies money at de same time as de good best suited for alleviate presently felt uncertainty and, like dis, de most universally present good of all.[^46] Although e dey only indirectly useful—for dis regard like producer goods, and unlike any consumer good—money dey precisely on account of im supreme saleability a uniquely present good—for dis regard like consumer goods, and unlike any producer good. Becus money fit employed for de instant removal of de widest range of possible needs (or de satisfaction of de widest range of possible desires), e provides im owner wit de best humanly possible protection (insurance) against uncertainty; dat is, against im uneasiness becus im no fit to predict—of no fit being certain about—all of im future needs and desires. In holding money, im owner gains in de satisfaction of being able instantly to meet, as dem rise unpredictably, de widest possible range of future contingencies.

> De keeping of cash holding requires sacrifices. To de extent say a man keeps im money for im pocket or for im balance wit a bank, im forsakes de instantaneous acquisition of goods e fit consume or employ for production.[^47]

Accordingly, to de extent say im feels certain about im future, a man want to invest for consumer and producer goods. Only to de extent say im feels uncertain about im future im go wan make de sacrifice referred to by Mises; dat is, im go possibly want to invest for relief from any uneasiness felt concerning de uncertainty of im future consumption—production (income—expenditure) pattern. Hence, rada dan indicating im increased willingness to sacrifice present satisfaction for exchange for future satisfaction, an increased demand for money demonstrates a man’s more intensely feel uncertainty about im future; and rada dan being an investment for de future, addition to im cash balance represents an investment in present certainty (protection) vis-à-vis a future perceived as less certain.[^48]

In light of dis praxeological reconstruction of money as singularly present good, Selgin and White’s entire positive case for fractional reserve banking dey revealed as mistaken. If banks indeed accommodate an (unanticipated) increased demand for money through de temporary issue of additional fiduciary media (credit), as Selgin and White propose, dis fit get only disruptive and disequilibrating effects. If and insofar as de accommodating response for de part of de banks dey unanticipated, de interest rate go reduced temporarily below im natural height, investment go increase, and de structure of production go be lengthened. Yet dis result dey fundamentally at odds wit de public’s demonstrated preference. De public perceives de future as more (increasingly) uncertain and, accordingly, striving to increase de size of im cash holdings and thereby bidding de prices of nonmoney goods down and correspondingly increasing de purchasing power per unit money, dey intent upon providing for more (increased) present protection against uncertainty. To commit additional resources to de future dey de expression of small public uncertainty (rada dan more), and thus stands for cross-purpose to de public’s actual wishes and implies a systematic misallocation of resources (to be revealed in a boom-bust cycle). And for any case, even if de banks’ accommodating money supply increase fit be fully anticipated and de structure of production no unduly lengthened, any such accommodation go still be disruptive, becus—even apart from im inescapable redistributionist consequences—e fit only delay de arrival of de desired goal. In order to be better protected against perceived uncertainty, prices must fall and de purchasing power of money must rise. With an additional influx of money, e no fit but take longer before dis goal dey accomplished.[^49]

### A Final Note: Some Mistaken Analogies

In light of the fundamental distinction between property (money) and property titles (money substitutes) explained for earlier sections of dis article and de foregoing elucidation of money as special present good, different analogies popularly employed for de attempted justification of fractional reserve banking fit be finally disposed of as mistaken. Even if dey correctly distinguish between property titles (tickets) and property, all proposed analogies—between fractional reserve banking on de one hand and airline overbooking, fractional reserve parking lots, lotteries, and insurance on de other hand—fail to recognize properly de fundamental distinction between present and future goods.

De owner of de title to money get present good (money property)—an indirectly yet immediately serviceable good. De fractional reserve banker dey found guilty of fraud; im issued and sell additional titles to unchanged quantity of money property. For distinct contrast; de owner of an airline ticket gets a future good. Hence, for overbooking now (today) flight for de future date (tomorrow), airline no fit possibly get committed fraud already now (today). Fraud no fit occur until tomorrow, when de tickets go must actually redeemed, and only if de airline dey den unable to satisfy each and every ticket holder’s claim. In fact, airlines typically fulfill dia contractual obligation: each ticket holder dey assured a seat for de scheduled flight, becus de airline dey prepared to pay every excess ticket holder off, dat is, to repurchase im ticket at a price (by exchange of another good) say de holder considers more valuable dan im present airline seat. And certainly, no airline typically oversells spot-tickets (titles to seats right now, dat is, present goods) and assigns two people to occupy de same seat, which is essentially what fractional reserve banking amounts to.

Similarly, de owner wey get fractionally covered parking permit (wit more permit holders dan parking spaces) no get present good. Im get de right to participate for a specified period of time for repeated search for parking space. De owner of de parking facility not fit possibly commit any fraud or selling im permits, unless im den refused entry to valid permit holder wen there go be empty space available, or if im changed de contractually agreed upon rules of de game; dat is, if im done agreed to print up to a maximum of 200 permits, for instance, but actually printed 300. E dey only de owner of a spot parking ticket, or de owner of a reserved parking space, who be owner of a present good; and there go be, of course, characteristically no overselling of spot spaces or of reserved parking.

De same reasoning applies to de case of lotteries. De holder of a lottery ticket no get any present good. Im get de right to participate for de drawing of specified prizes, whereby im self-understood among buyer and seller—as inherent for de nature of a lottery—say there are—and must be—more tickets dan prizes. De lottery operator no fit possibly get committed any crime, unless im failed to redeem de winning tickets into de promised prizes or surreptitiously changed de preannounced rules of de game. If dis na rarely de case, E dey practically unheard of say lottery go print more dan one winning ticket for one and de same prize (present good), which fit be likewise fraudulent, of course, and which is essentially wat fractional reserve bankers do.

Finally, De proposed analogy between fractional reserve banking and insurance done already dey refuted implicitly for note 46 above, concerning de relationship between risk and insurance for de one hand and uncertainty and money on de oda. Unlike de owner of money, de owner of de insurance policy neva get present but de future good. An insurance company fit be unable to meet its contractually assumed obligations for some future pointin time, and one fit den come to de conclusion say im get engaged for overselling of tickets. Howeva, e dey impossible to say dat crime done already commit now, for de moment wen de insurance policy done sell, becus de good sell by de insurance agency na de future one. For distinct contrast, de owner of de money ticket na de owner of a present good, and every overissue of tickets to present goods na from de very outset—instantly and immediately—fraudulent, and accordingly dey contrary to market ethics.

[^39]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media”, p. 102.

[^40]: Ibid., p. 103.

[^41]: Ibid., p. 102.

[^42]: Selgin and White’s view here dey quite similar to dat of Keynes (De General Theory, pp. 293–94), when im emphasized say “de importance of money essentially flows from im being a link between de present and de future”, and characterized money as “above all, a subtle device for linking de present and de future”.

[^43]: Put differently: rada dan, as Selgin and White (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media”, p. 102) say, dat “de demand for cash stems from de convenience it allows one in purchasing … goods at uncertain future dates”, de demand for money stems from de convenience it allows one in purchasing goods at uncertain future dates.

[^44]: Mises, Human Action, p. 249.

[^45]: Mises, The Theory of Money and Credit, pp. 32–33.

[^46]: In fact, one it only wonder how Selgin and White fit get possibly overlooked money’s character as a uniquely present good. After all, de interest rate as ce most visible manifestation of ce phenomenon of time preference na expressed in terms of money.

[^47]: Mises, Human Action, p. 430. De term uncertainty dey employed here dey im technical meaning as defined by Frank H. Knight (Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971], esp. chap. 7) and Mises (Human Action, esp. chap. 6); that is, as categorically distinct from risk instances of class probability; also Hoppe (“On Certainty and Uncertainty, Or: How Rational Can Our Expectations Be?” Review of Austrian Economics 10, no. 1(1979): 49–78). Insofar as man faces a risky future, he no need to hold money. In order to satisfy im desire to be protected against risks, im fit instead buy (or produce) insurance. A buyer of insurance demonstrates by im purchase say im no in fact certain about some future events. Hence, for paying a premium, im sacrifices de present good for exchange for future one (payment for de event of actual risk-damage) and so contributes to and invests in a physical structure of production. Specifically, im premium becomes embodied for de production structure maintained by im insurance agency. For distinct contrast: insofar as man faces uncertainty im be, quite literally not certain concerning im future, dat is, as to wating go happen to him and when. Hence, in order to be protected against uncertainty, im no fit possibly invest for any future good. Only present goods fit insure against instantly arising—unpredictable—events. Or im fit invest or (present) consumer goods (for dis go mean say im actually feel certain as to de specific nature of im future contingencies). Only a medium of exchange, on account of im supreme saleability, fit insure im against contingencies of an uncertain nature. Hence, just as insurance na de price dat must be paid for protection against risks, so money holdings na de price wey must be paid for protection against uncertainty. See also the following final note below.

[^48]: Selgin and White never raise de question of why changes for e demand for money occur, and thus neva penetrate to dia ultimate—microeconomic—sources; dat is, changes in individuals’ subjective evaluations of presently perceived personal uncertainty. In contrast, whereas dey portray changes for de demand for money as seemingly unmotivated and inexplicable events, Mises dey explicit and emphatic about the irrational character:

> De advantages and disadvantages derived from money holding no dey objective factors which fit directly influence de size of money holdings. Dem put am on de scales by each person and weighed against one another. De result na subjective judgment of value, colored by ce individual’s personality. Different people and de same people at different times value de same objective facts for different way. Just as knowledge of a man’s wealth and im physical condition no tell us how much im go fit prepared to spend for food of a certain nutritive power, so knowledge about data concerning a man’s material situation no enable us to make definite assertions with regard to de size of im money holding. (Mises, Human Action, p. 430)

[^49]: Mises summarizes:

> De services money renders dey conditioned by de height of im purchasing power. Nobody want to get in money holding a definite number of pieces of money or definite weight of money; im want keep money holding of a definite amount of purchasing power. As de operation of de market tends to determine de final state of money’s purchasing power at a height at which de supply of and de demand for money coincide, dem no go ever be excess or a deficiency of money. Each person and all person together always enjoy fully de advantages which dem fit desire from indirect exchange and de use of money, no matter whether de total quantity of money dey great or small. Changes in money’s purchasing power generate changes for de disposition of wealth among de various members of society. From de point of view of people eager to be enriched by such changes, de supply of money fit be called insufficient or excessive, and de appetite for dis kind gain fit result in policies designed to bring about money-induced alterations for purchasing power. Howeva, de services wey money renders fit be neither improved or repaired by changing de supply of money. There fit appear an excess or a deficiency of money for de cash holding. But dis kind condition fit be remedied by increasing or decreasing consumption or investment. (Of course, person must not fall prey to de popular confusion between de demand for money for cash holding and ce appetite for more wealth.) De quantity of money wey dey available for de whole economy dey always sufficient to secure for everybody all wey money no and cfit do. (Mises, Human Action, p. 421)
