### Intimidation by Argument 

[^0]: Reply to Loren Lomasky, “The Argument From Mere Argument”, *Liberty* (September 1989).

Loren Lomasky bin dey intimidated and e dey vex bcos of my book *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*. For one, bcos de book dey more ambitious dan e title indicate. “It is”, he laments, “no less than a manifesto for untrammeled anarchism”. Make e be like dat. But so what? As my book don explain but conveniently dey unmentioned by Lomasky, untrammeled anarchism na notin but de name for a social order of untrammeled private property rights, i.e., of de absolute right of selfownership and de absolute right to homestead unowned resources, of employing dem for whateva purpose person see fit so long as e nor affect de physical integrity of oda people  likewise appropriated resources, and of entering into any contractual agreement wit oda property owners wey dey see to dey mutually beneficial. Wetin dey so horrifying about dis idea? Empirically speaking, dis property theory constitutes de hard core of most people intuitive sense of justice and so fit hardly dey called revolutionary. Na only person wey dey advocate de trammeling of private property rights go take offense, as Lomasky dey do, wit my attempt to justify a pure private-property economy.

Lomasky nor only dey enraged wit my conclusions, howeva. E anger dey further aggravated bcos I nor merely try to provide empirical evidence for dem, but rigorous proof, Lomasky dey disapprove, “validated by pure reason and uncontaminated by any merely empirical likelihoods”. E nor dey surprising say an opponent of untrammeled private property rights, such as Lomasky, go find dis undertaking doubly offensive. Yet wetin dey wrong with de idea of *a priori-theorizing* in economics and ethics? Lomasky don point out sag failed attempts to construct a priori theories dey exist. But so what? Dis only dey reflects on dose particular theories. Moreova, e actually dey presuppose de existence of a priori reasoning in dat de refutation of a priori theory gats eself be proof. For Lomasky, howeva, notin but intellectual hyperbole fit possibly dey responsible for “eschewing the low road of empiricism, soaring instead with Kant, and von Mises through the realm of a priori necessities”. A book on political philosophy or economy, den, suppose nor come up wit unambiguous conclusions as to wetin person suppose do or wetin be de rules wey e suppose follow. Everytin gats dey left vague and at a nonoperational stage of conceptual development, and nobody suppose ever try to prove anytin  but instead gats follow de foreva open-minded empiricist approach of trial and error, of tentative conjectures, of refutations, and of confirmations. Such, for Lomasky, na de proper path, de low and humble road, along which person gate to travel. E sure reach, most contemporary political philosophers seem to don wholeheartedly follow dis advice on dia way to fame. Taking de high road instead, I don present an unambiguous thesis, wey I don state in operational terms, and attempt to prove am by axiomatic-deductive arguments. If dis go make my book de ultimate insult in some philosophical circles, so much de better. Apart from oda advantages, so dis fit actually be de only appropriate method of inquiry, e at least dey forces person to say somehin specific and to open person up wide to rigorous logical-praxeological criticism instead of producing, as Lomasky and e fellow low roaders, meaningless nonoperational moonshine talk and distinctions.

Besides finding fault wit de arrogance of person to write book wey dey present a praxeologically meaningful and easily understandable thesis concerning de central problems of political philosophy and economy, and wey dey vigorously defend am to de point of excluding any oda answer as false, Lomasky also get some specific nits to pick. As go normally dey expected from an intimidated low roader, dem be either unsystematic cheap shots, or dem dey display a complete miscomprehension of de problem.

I dey criticized for not paying enof attention to Quine, Nozick, and entire bodies of philosophic thought. E fit be so, tho Nozick, if only for footnote as Lomasky don note indignantly, dey actually systematically refuted. Howeva, person go  like know why dat one go make any difference for my argument. Mere reading suggestions dey very easy to come up wit for dese times. I don deycriticized for misinterpreting Locke as I nor mention e famous proviso, but I nor det engaged to dey interprete Locke. I construct a positive theory and in so doing employ Lockean ideas; and assuming say my theory correct for dd sake of argument, doubt nor go dey as to my verdict on de proviso. E dey false, and e nor dey incompatible wit de homesteading principle as de central pillar of Locke theory. Lomasky nor demonstrate say nor be so. He dey annoyed at my dissolution of de public goods problem as a pseudo-problem witout so much as to mention my central contention regarding de matter, i.e., say dee notion of objectively distinct classes of private vs. public goods dey incompatible wit subjectivist economics and so must fall by de wayside along wit all distinctions based on am. He dey find my arguments in support of de thesis of de ever-optimality of free markets wanting because dem gats rely on de assumption of “the universal optimality of voluntary transactions”. Dey gats indeed. I neva claime anytin else. Yet dis assumption happens to dey true—in fact, as I argue, indisputably true. So wetin xup? Or Lomasky dey willing to take on de task of proving am to dey false?! How I go—in a footnote—criticize Buchanan and Tullock for Orwellian double-talk, Lomasky dey complain. Only say he dey forget to mention say I give rather specific reasons for dis characterization: among odas, de use of de notion of “conceptual” agreements and contracts in dia attempt to justify a state wen according to ordinary speech, such agreements and contracts na nonagreements and noncontracts. Noncontracting means contracting! Similarly, for my oh-so-disrespectful remarks regarding Chicago-style property theories I don give reasons (dua assumption of de measurability of utility, for instance), wey Lomasky simply dey suppresse. De rest, regarding my theory of justice, na either miscomprehension or deliberate misrepresentation. From reading Lomasky’s reconstruction of my central argument, wey revealingly employ no direct quotes, nobody go grasp e main thrust and structure: Witout scarcity  no interpersonal conflict go dey and hence no ethical questions (wetin I dey justified to do and wat not?). Conflicts na de result of incompatible claims regarding scarce resources, and dere dey but one possible way out of such predicaments: thru de formulation of rules wey dey assign mutually exclusive ownership titles regarding scarce, physical resources so as to make am possible for different actors to act simultaneously witout dereby generating conflict. (Like most contemporary philosophers, Lomasky give no indication say he don grasp de elementary yet fundamental point say any political philosophy wey nor dey construed as a theory of property rights fails entirely in e own objective and so gats dey discarded from de outset as praxeologically meaningless moonshine.)

Yet scarcity, and the possibility of conflicts, is not sufficient for the emergence of ethical problems. Obviously, one could have conflicts regarding scarce resources with an animal, yet one would not consider it possible to resolve these conflicts by means of proposing property norms. In such cases, the avoidance of conflicts is merely a technical, not an ethical, problem. For it to become an ethical problem, it is also necessary that the conflicting actors be capable, in principle, of argumentation. (Lomasky’s mosquito example is thus silly: Animals are no moral agents, because they are incapable of argumentation. My theory of justice explicitly denies its applicability to animals and, in fact, implies that they have no rights!)

Further, that there can be no problem of ethics without argumentation is indisputable. Not only have I been engaged in argumentation all along, but it is impossible, without falling into a contradiction, to deny that whether or not one has any rights and, if any which ones, must be decided in the course of argumentation. Thus, there can be no ethical justification of anything, except insofar as it is argumentative. This has been called “the a priori of argumentation”. (Insofar as Lomasky has at all understood this, he most definitely appears to be unaware of the axiomatic status of this proposition, i.e., of the fact that the a priori of argumentation provides an absolute starting point, neither capable of, nor requiring, any further justification!)

Arguing is an activity and requires a person’s exclusive control over scarce resources (one’s brain, vocal cords, etc.). More specifically, as long as there is argumentation, there is a mutual recognition of each other’s exclusive control over such resources. It is this which explains the unique feature of communication: that while one may disagree about what has been said, it is still possible to independently agree at least on the fact that there is disagreement. (Lomasky does not seem to dispute this. He claims, however, that it merely proves the *fact* of mutually exclusive domains of control, not the *right* of self-ownership. He errs. Whatever [the law of contradiction, for instance] must be presupposed insofar as one argues cannot be meaningfully disputed because it is the very precondition of meaningful doubt; hence, it must be regarded as indisputable or *a priori valid*. In the same vein, the fact of self-ownership is a praxeological precondition of argumentation. Anyone trying to prove or disprove anything must be a self-owner. It is a self-contradictory absurdity to ask for any further-reaching justification for this fact. Required, of necessity, by all meaningful argumentation, self-ownership is an absolutely and ultimately *justified* fact.)

Finally, if actors were not entitled to own physical resources other than their bodies, and if they as moral agents—categorically different from Lomasky’s mosquitoes—were to follow this prescription, they would be dead and no problem whatsoever would exist. For ethical problems to exist, then, ownership in other things must be justified. Further, if one were not allowed to appropriate other resources through homesteading action, i.e., by putting them to use before anybody else does, or if the range of objects to be homesteaded were somehow limited, this would only be possible if ownership could be acquired by mere decree instead of by action. However, this does not qualify as a solution to the problem of ethics, i.e., of conflict-avoidance, even on purely technical grounds, for it would not allow one to decide what to do if such declarative claims happened to be incompatible. More decisive still, it would be incompatible with the already justified self-ownership, for if one could appropriate resources by decree, this would imply that one could also declare another person’s body to be one’s own. Thus, anyone denying the validity of the homesteading principle—whose recognition is already implicit in arguing two persons’ mutual respect for each other’s exclusive control over his own body—would contradict the content of his proposition through his very act of proposition making. (For one thing, in a stroke of genius, Lomasky finds fault with the fact that the first part of this argument provides no justification for unlimited homesteading. True. But then it also does not claim to do any such thing. The second part—the *argumentum a contrario*—does. Regarding my argument in its entirety Lomasky claims that I have only shown the validity of the nonaggression principle for the act of argument itself and not beyond... it does not extend to the object of discussion. At best, this objection indicates a total failure to grasp the nature of performative contradictions: If justification of anything is argumentative justification, and if what must be presupposed by any argumentation whatsoever must be considered ultimately justified, then any validity claiming proposition whose content is incompatible with such ultimately justified facts is ultimately falsified as involving a performative contradiction. And that is that.)

Philosophic and economic theorizing is indeed serious work.
