## #

Tidak dapat diragukan lagi, kemudian, bahwa pajak selalu mengurangi produksi dan ini merupakan standar pemakai untuk hidup. Apapun cara yang hal-hal yang dimasukkan, kesimpulannya tidak ada cara terlepas bahwa pajak adalah sarana untuk menghalangi pembentukan kekayaan dan dengan demikian menciptakan kemiskinan yang relatif banyak.

Ini membawa saya ke topik kedua saya: sosiologi perpajakan. Jika perpajakan adalah instrumen untuk penghancuran formasi kekayaan, maka pertanyaannya langsung mendesak bagaimana dapat dijelaskan bahwa ada perpajakan; bahwa ada lebih dari itu; yang telah kita alami, khususnya selama seratus tahun terakhir, peningkatan yang bagus tidak hanya dalam tingkat absolut tetapi juga di tingkat pajak yang relatif; dan begitu institusi yang memimpin dalam proses ini, negara-negara pajak di Dunia Barat, secara bersamaan telah mengambil posisi yang lebih kuat di arena politik internasional dan semakin mendominasi dunia.

Dengan pertanyaan ini, seseorang mewariskan ranah teori ekonomi. Ilmu ekonomi menjawab pertanyaan "Apa konsekuensinya jika perpajakan diperkenalkan?" Ini menyimpulkan jawaban dari pemahaman tentang makna tindakan dan arti perpajakan sebagai jenis tindakan tertentu. Mengapa perpajakan adalah subyek psikologi, sejarah, atau sosiologi. Ilmu ekonomi, atau lebih tepatnya praksiologi, mengakui bahwa semua tindakan ditentukan oleh gagasan, benar atau tidak benar, baik atau buruk. Tapi itu tidak berusaha menjelaskan apa gagasan ini dan bagaimana orang bisa menahan atau mengubahnya. Sebaliknya, ini mengasumsikan mereka diberi dan bertujuan untuk menjelaskan konsekuensi logis yang mengalir dari tindakan terhadap mereka, apapun itu. Sejarah dan sosiologi bertanya apa gagasan ini, bagaimana orang datang untuk menghibur mereka, dan mengapa mereka bertindak seperti itu.[^16]

Pada tingkat yang sangat abstrak, jawaban atas pertanyaan mengapa ada perpajakan yang terus meningkat adalah ini: Akar penyebabnya adalah perubahan yang lambat namun dramatis dalam gagasan keadilan yang telah terjadi dalam opini publik.

Mari saya jelaskan. Seseorang dapat memperoleh properti baik melalui pendudukan, produksi, dan kontrak, atau melalui pengambilalihan dan eksploitasi wisma, produsen, atau kontraktor. Tidak ada cara lain.[^17] Kedua metode itu alami bagi umat manusia. Di samping produksi dan kontrak, selalu ada proses akuisisi properti nonproduktif dan nonkontrak. Sama seperti usaha produktif dapat berkembang menjadi firma dan perusahaan, sehingga bisnis pengambilalihan dan eksploitasi dapat terjadi dalam skala yang lebih besar dan berkembang menjadi pemerintah dan negara.[^18] Perpajakan seperti itu ada dan disitu ada dorongan menuju peningkatan pajak harus tidak mengejutkan. Karena gagasan tentang alokasi nonproduktif atau nonkontrak hampir sama tuanya dengan gagasan yang produktif, dan semua orang-pemeras pasti tidak kurang dari produsen-lebih memilih pendapatan lebih tinggi dibandingkan yang lebih rendah.

Pertanyaan yang tegas adalah: apa yang mengendalikan dan membatasi ukuran dan pertumbuhan bisnis seperti itu?

Harus jelas bahwa kendala ukuran perusahaan dalam bisnis pengambilalihan produsen dan kontraktor bersifat kategoris berbeda dari pada yang membatasi ukuran perusahaan yang terlibat dalam pertukaran produktif. Bertentangan dengan klaim sekolah pilihan publik, pemerintah dan perusahaan swasta pada dasarnya tidak memiliki jenis usaha yang sama. Mereka terlibat dalam berbagai jenis operasi yang berbeda.[^19]

Ukuran perusahaan produktif dibatasi oleh permintaan konsumen (yang membatasi batas total pendapatan yang dapat dicapai), dan di sisi lain oleh persaingan produsen lain, yang terus memaksa setiap perusahaan untuk beroperasi dengan biaya terendah yang mungkin jika ingin bertahan dalam bisnis. Untuk sebuah perusahaan untuk tumbuh dalam ukuran yang paling mendesak keinginan konsumen harus disajikan dalam cara yang paling efisien. Tidak masalah tetapi konseumen akan sukarela mendukung ukuran tersebut.

Kendala-kendala pada jenis lain dari perusahaan, pemerintah atau negara, yang sama sekali berbeda. Untuk satu hal, itu tidak masuk akal untuk mengatakan bahwa ukurannya ditentukan oleh permintaan dalam arti yang sama sebagai ukuran dari sebuah perusahaan swasta yang ditentukan oleh permintaan. Orang tidak bisa mengatakan, dengan imajinasi apapun, bahwa para penghuni, produsen, dan kontraktor yang harus menyerahkan sebagian aset mereka kepada pemerintah telah menuntut layanan semacam itu. Sebagai gantinya, mereka harus dipaksa untuk menerimanya, dan ini adalah bukti nyata bahwa sebenarnya layanan tersebut sebenarnya tidak sesuai permintaan. Makanya, permintaan tidak bisa dianggap sebagai batas ukuran pemerintah. Selamatumbuh, negara tumbuh bertindak dengan *bertentangan* terbuka dalam  tuntutan.

Negara juga tidak memiliki cara yang sama dibatasi oleh persaingan seperti sebuah firma produktif. Tidak seperti firma, negara tidak harus menjaga biaya operasi yang minimal tetapi dapat beroperasi di atas minimum biaya karena mampu menggeser biaya yang lebih tinggi ke pesaingnya dengan mengenakan pajak atau mengatur perilaku mereka. Dengan demikian, ukuran negara juga tidak bisa dianggap dibatasi oleh persaingan biaya. Sejauh ini tumbuh, hal ini tidak terlepas dari fakta bahwa itu adalah *tidak* efisien-biaya.

Namun, ini bukan berarti bahwa ukuran pemerintah tidak dibatasi sama sekali dan bahwa fluktuasi historis dalam ukuran negara hanyalah sembarangan asal-asalan. Ini hanya menyatakan bahwa kendala pada "pemerintah" perusahaan harus berbeda secara mendasar.

Bukannya dibatasi oleh biaya, dan kondisi permintaan, pertumbuhan eksploitatif perusahaan dibatasi oleh opini publik:[^20] Hal ini tidak didukung secara sukarela, tetapi dengan sifat yang menggunakan paksaan. Di sisi lain dari kasus yang sama, pemaksaan berarti menciptakan korban, dan korban bukan mendukung aktif atau pasif tapi penghambat dari ukuran perusahaan.  Bisa dibayangkan bahwa perlawanan ini dapat dipatahkan dengan kekerasan dalam kasus satu orang, atau satu kelompok laki-laki, mengeksploitasi satu atau mungkin dua atau tiga orang lainnya, atau kelompok lain yang memiliki ukuran yang kira-kira sama. Akan tetapi, tidak dapat dibayangkan, membayangkan bahwa kekuatan itu sendiri dapat menjelaskan pemecah resistensi dalam kasus minoritas kecil yang benar-benar dikenal yang menjalankan bisnis mereka untuk mengambil dan mengeksploitasi populasi puluhan, ratusan, atau ribuan kali ukurannya.[^21] Agar hal ini terjadi, perusahaan semacam itu harus mendapat dukungan publik selain kekuatan pemaksaannya. Mayoritas penduduk harus menerima operasinya sebagai hal yang sah. Penerimaan ini bisa berkisar dari antusiasme aktif hingga pengunduran diri secara pasif. Tetapi harus ada penerimaan dalam arti bahwa mayoritas harus telah melepaskan gagasan untuk secara aktif atau pasif menolak usaha apa pun untuk menerapkan akuisisi properti nonproduktif dan nonkontrak. Alih-alih menampilkan kemarahan atas tindakan semacam itu, menunjukkan penghinaan terhadap setiap orang yang terlibat di dalamnya, dan tidak berbuat apa-apa untuk membantu membuat mereka sukses (belum lagi secara aktif berusaha menghalangi mereka), mayoritas harus secara aktif atau pasif mendukungnya. Hanya dengan menerangi ini dapat dijelaskan bagaimana sedikit bisa mengatur yang banyak. Negara-mendukung opini publik harus mengimbangi perlawanan dari korban pemilik properti untuk sejauh yang aktif perlawanan tampaknya sia-sia.

Keadaan opini publik juga membebankan kendala pada ukuran negara dalam hal lain. Setiap perusahaan dalam bisnis skala besar pengambilalihan properti secara alamiah bertujuan untuk menjadi monopolis di wilayah yang pasti, karena seseorang hanya bisa menjadi makmur dalam bisnis semacam itu asalkan ada sesuatu yang dapat diambil alih. Namun, jika kompetisi diizinkan dalam usaha pengambilalihan, pasti tidak akan ada lagi yang harus dilakukan. Oleh karena itu, agar tetap dalam bisnis, seseorang harus menjadi perusahaan monopoli.

Even if there is no internal competition, competition between governments operating in *different* territories still exists, and it is this competition that imposes severe limits on the size of government. On the one hand, it opens up the possibility that people may vote with their feet against a government and leave its territory if they perceive other territories as offering less exploitative living conditions. Naturally, each state must see this as a crucial problem, for it literally lives off a population, and any population loss is thus a loss of potential state-income.[^22] Again, the state of public opinion is of utmost importance for maintaining exploitative rule. Only if the state succeeds in generating the impression in the general public that that state’s own territory compares favorably, or at least tolerably well with others will it be able to secure and expand its position.

Public opinion also plays a decisive role in the case of interstate aggression. While not a logical necessity, the nature of a state as an exploitative enterprise still makes it highly likely (not the least because of the just addressed problem of population movements) that it will become engaged in aggression against a “foreign” territory, or that it must defend itself against such aggression from other states.[^23] Moreover, in order to emerge successfully from such interstate wars or warlike actions, a state must be in command of sufficient (in relative terms) economic resources that alone make its actions sustainable. However, these resources can only be provided by a productive population. Thus, to secure the means necessary to win wars and avoid being confronted with slackening productive outputs while at war, public opinion again turns out to be the decisive variable controlling the size of government. Only if popular support for the state’s war exists can it be sustained and possibly won.

Finally, the state of public opinion limits the size of government in yet a third way. While the state maintains its position vis-à-vis the exploited population through coercion and the successful management of public opinion, to maintain its own internal order, which regulates the relationships between the various branches of government and its employees, there is nothing else at its disposal but public opinion, for clearly, no one outside the state exists who could enforce its internal rules upon it. Rather, the enforcement must be accomplished exclusively by means of supportive public opinion among state employees themselves in the various branches of government.[^24] That is, the president cannot coerce the general to go to war—in fact, the greater physical strength would probably be on the general’s side; and the general in turn cannot coerce his soldiers to do the fighting and killing—in fact, they could smash him anytime. President and general can only succeed because of favorable intrastate public opinion, and only insofar as the overwhelming majority of the state employees at least passively supports their actions as legitimate. If, in the various branches of government, a large majority of them were strictly opposed to the enforcement of presidential policy, it could not be put into action successfully. The general who thinks most of his troops consider the war illegitimate or who thinks that the Congress, the IRS, the large majority of public educators and the so-called social services regard such actions as outrageous and to be openly opposed, would face an impossible task even if he himself supported the presidential command.[^25]

With public opinion rather than demand and cost conditions thus identified as the constraining force on the size of government, I return to my original explanation of the phenomenon of ever-increasing taxation as “simply” a change in prevailing ideas.

If it is public opinion that ultimately limits the size of an exploitative firm, then an explanation of its growth in purely ideological terms is justified. Indeed, any other explanation, not in terms of ideological changes but of changes in “objective” conditions must be considered wrong. The size of government does not increase because of any objective causes over which ideas have no control and certainly not because there is a demand for it. It grows because the ideas that prevail in public opinion of what is just and what is wrong have changed. What once was regarded by public opinion as an outrage, to be treated and dealt with as such, has become increasingly accepted as legitimate.

What has happened regarding the general public’s conception of justice?[^26]

[^16]: To make this distinction between economics and history or sociology is not to say, of course, that economics is of no importance for these latter disciplines. In fact, economics is indispensable for all other social sciences. While the reverse is not the case, economics can be developed and advanced without historical or sociological knowledge. The only consequence of doing so is that such economics would probably not be very interesting, as it would be written without consideration of real examples or instances of application (as if one were to write on the economics of taxation even though there had never been an actual example of it in all of history), for it would formulate what could not possibly happen in the social world, or what would have to happen provided that certain conditions were in fact fulfilled. Thus, any historical or sociological explanation is logically constrained by the laws as espoused by economic theory, and any account by a historian or sociologist in violation of these laws must be treated as ultimately confused. On the relationship between economic theory and history see also Ludwig von Mises, *Theory and History* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^17]: See on this also Franz Oppenheimer, *The State* (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914) esp. pp. 24–27; Rothbard, *Power and Market*, chap. 2; Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chap. 2.

[^18]: On the theory of the state as developed in the following see—in addition to the works cited in note 17—in particular Herbert Spencer, *Social Statics* (New York: Schalkenbach Foundation, 1970); Auberon Herbert, *The Right and Wrong of Compulsion by the State* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1978); Albert J. Nock, *Our Enemy, the State* (Tampa, Fla.: Hallberg Publishing, 1983); Murray N. Rothbard, *For a New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); Anthony de Jasay, *The State* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).

[^19]: This central idea of the public choice school has been expressed by its foremost representatives as follows:

> Both the economic relation and the political relation represent cooperation on the part of two or more individuals. The market and the state are both devices through which co-operation is organized and made possible. Men co-operate through exchange of goods and services in organized markets, and such co-operation implies mutual gain. The individual enters into an exchange relationship in which he furthers his own interest by providing some product or service that is of direct benefit to the individual on the other side of the transaction. At base, political or collective action under the individualistic view of the State is much the same. Two or more individuals find it mutually advantageous to join forces to accomplish certain common purposes. In a very real sense, they “exchange” and devote resources to the construction of the common good. (James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* [Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press], p. 192)

Surely, the most amazing thing about such a “new theory of politics” is that anyone takes it seriously. Remarks Joseph A. Schumpeter on such views:

> The theory which construes taxes on the analogy of club dues or the purchase of the service of, say, a doctor only proves how far removed this part of the social sciences is from scientific habits of mind. (*Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy* [New York: Harper, 1942], p. 198)

And H.L. Mencken has this to say regarding a thesis such as Buchanan’s and Tullock’s:

> The average man, whatever his errors otherwise, at least sees clearly that government is something lying outside him and outside the generality of his fellow men—that it is a separate, independent and often hostile power, only partly under his control, and capable of doing him great harm…. Is it a fact of no significance that robbing the government is everywhere regarded as a crime of less magnitude than robbing an individual, or even a corporation? … When a private citizen is robbed a worthy man is deprived of the fruits of his industry and thrift; when the government is robbed the worst that happens is that certain rogues and loafers have less money to play with than they had before. The notion that they have earned that money is never entertained; to most sensible men it would seem ludicrous. They are simply rascals who, by accidents of law, have a somewhat dubious right to a share in the earnings of their fellow men. When that share is diminished by private enterprise the business is, on the whole, far more laudable than not. (*A Mencken Chrestomathy* [New York: Vintage Books, 1949] pp. 146–47)

[^20]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Anatomy of the State” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974), esp. pp. 37–42.

[^21]: It might be thought that the government could accomplish such a feat by merely improving its weaponry: by threatening with atomic bombs instead of with guns and rifles, so to speak. However, since realistically one must assume that the technological know-how of such improved weaponry can hardly be kept secret, especially if it is in fact applied, then with the state’s improved instruments for instilling fear the victims’ ways amid means of resisting improve as well. Hence, such advances must be ruled out as an explanation of what must be explained.

[^22]: Witness the all-too-numerous states that go so far as to shoot everyone down without mercy who has committed no other sin than that of trying to leave a territory and move elsewhere!

[^23]: On the intimate relationship between state and war see the important study by Ekkehart Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1985); also Charles Tilly, “War Making and State Making as Organized Crime” in Peter Evans et al., eds., *Bringing the State Back In* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).

[^24]: This insight (which refutes all talk about the impossibility of anarchism in showing that intra-governmental relations are, in fact, a case of—political—anarchy) has been explained in a highly important article by Alfred G. Cuzán, “Do We Ever Really Get Out of Anarchy”, *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979).

> Wherever earthly governments are established or exist, anarchy is officially prohibited for all members of society, usually referred to as subjects or citizens. They can no longer relate to each other on their own terms…. Rather, all members of society must accept an external “third party”—a government—into their relationships, a third party with the coercive powers to enforce its judgments and punish detractors…. However, such a “third party” arrangement for society is non-existent among those who exercise the power of government themselves. In other words, there is no “third party” to make and enforce judgments among the individual members who make up the third party itself. The rulers still remain in a state of anarchy *vis-à-vis* each other. They settle disputes *among themselves*, without regard for a Government (an entity outside themselves). Anarchy still exists. Only whereas without government it was market or natural anarchy, it is now a *political* anarchy, an anarchy inside power. (Cuzán, pp. 152–53)

[^25]: One of the classic expositors of this idea is David Hume. In his essay, “Of The First Principles of Government”, he writes:

> Nothing appears more surprising to those, who consider human affairs with a philosophical eye, than the easiness with which the many are governed by the few; and the implicit submission, with which men resign their own sentiments and passions to those of their rulers. When we enquire by what means this wonder is effected, we shall find, that as FORCE is always on the side of the governed, the governors have nothing to support them but opinion. It is therefore, on opinion only that government is founded; and this maxim extends to the most despotic and most military governments, as well as to the most free and most popular. The soldan of EGYPT, or the emperor of ROME, might drive his harmless subjects, like brute beasts, against their sentiments and inclination: but he must, at least, have led his *mamalukes*, or *praetorian bands*, like men, by their opinion. (*Essays, Moral, Political and Literary* [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971], p. 19)

[^26]: See on the following in particular also Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right: The Prospects for Liberty” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays*.
