Third, anyone who has seen state-run police stations and courts, not to mention prisons, knows how true it is that the factors of production used to provide us with such security are overused, badly maintained, and filthy. Since no one using these factors of production actually owns them (no one can sell them and privately appropriate the receipts from sale) and losses (and gains) in the value embodied in the capital used are thus socialized, everybody will tend to increase his private income resulting from the use of the factors at the expense of losses in capital value. Hence, marginal cost will increasingly tend to exceed the value of marginal product, and an overutilization of capital will result. And if, in an exceptional case, this happens not to be so and an overutilization should not be apparent, then this has only been possible at costs that are comparatively much higher than those of any similar private business.[^26]

Ketiga, siapa saja yang pernah melihat kantor polisi dan pengadilan negara bagian, belum lagi penjara, mengetahui bagaimana faktor produksi yang digunakan untuk memberi kami keamanan seperti itu terlalu sering digunakan, tidak dikelola dengan baik, dan kotor. Karena tidak ada yang menggunakan faktor produksi ini benar-benar memilikinya (tidak ada yang bisa menjualnya dan secara pribadi sesuai dengan penerimaan dari penjualan) dan kerugian (dan keuntungan) atas nilai yang terkandung di dalam modal yang digunakan disosialisasikan, setiap orang akan cenderung meningkatkan privasinya. pendapatan yang dihasilkan dari penggunaan faktor-faktor tersebut dengan mengorbankan kerugian dalam nilai modal. Oleh karena itu, biaya marjinal akan semakin cenderung melebihi nilai produk marjinal, dan overutilisasi modal akan terjadi. Dan jika, dalam kasus yang luar biasa, ini terjadi agar tidak terjadi dan overutilisasi seharusnya tidak terlihat, maka ini mungkin saja dengan biaya yang relatif jauh lebih tinggi daripada bisnis pribadi yang sejenis.[^26]


Without a doubt, all of these problems inherent in a system of monopolistic security production would be solved relatively quickly once a given demand for security services was met by a competitive market with its entirely different incentive structure for producers. This is not to say that a “perfect” solution to the problem of security would be found. There would still be robberies and murders; and not all loot would be recovered nor all murderers caught. Furthermore, all security producers taken together could not bolster the importance of their particular industry unless, for whatever reasons, consumers indeed started evaluating security more highly than other goods, thus ensuring that the production of security would never take place at the expense of the non- or reduced production of, let us say, cheese, as a competing private good. In addition, the producers of security services would have to diversify their offerings to a considerable degree because a highly diversified demand for security products among millions and millions of consumers exists. Directly dependent on voluntary consumer support, they would immediately be hurt financially if they did not appropriately respond to the consumers’ various wants or change in wants. Thus every consumer would have a direct influence, albeit small, on the output of goods appearing on or disappearing from the security market. Instead of offering a uniform “security packet” to everyone, a characteristic of state production policy, a multitude of service packages would appear on the market. They would be tailored to the different security needs of different people, taking account of different occupations, different risk-taking behavior, different needs for protection and insurance, and different geographical locations and time constraints.

Tanpa diragukan lagi, semua masalah yang melekat pada sistem produksi keamanan monopoli ini dapat diselesaikan dengan cepat setelah permintaan atas layanan keamanan dipenuhi oleh pasar yang kompetitif dengan struktur insentif yang sama sekali berbeda bagi produsen. Ini bukan untuk mengatakan bahwa solusi "sempurna" untuk masalah keamanan akan ditemukan. Masih akan ada perampokan dan pembunuhan; dan tidak semua jarahan akan dipulihkan atau semua pembunuh tertangkap. Selanjutnya, semua produsen keamanan yang disatukan tidak dapat memperkuat pentingnya industri khusus mereka kecuali jika karena alasan apapun, konsumen memang mulai mengevaluasi keamanan lebih tinggi daripada barang lainnya, sehingga memastikan bahwa produksi keamanan tidak akan pernah terjadi dengan mengorbankan pihak non - atau mengurangi produksi, katakanlah, keju, sebagai persaingan pribadi yang baik. Selain itu, produsen layanan keamanan harus melakukan diversifikasi penawaran mereka sampai tingkat yang cukup tinggi karena permintaan produk keamanan yang sangat beragam di antara jutaan dan jutaan konsumen ada. Langsung bergantung pada dukungan konsumen sukarela, mereka segera akan dilukai secara finansial jika mereka tidak menanggapi dengan tepat berbagai keinginan konsumen atau perubahan keinginan. Dengan demikian setiap konsumen akan memiliki pengaruh langsung, walaupun kecil, pada output barang yang muncul pada atau hilang dari pasar keamanan. Alih-alih menawarkan "paket keamanan" seragam untuk semua orang, karakteristik kebijakan produksi negara, banyak paket layanan akan muncul di pasaran. Mereka disesuaikan dengan kebutuhan keamanan yang berbeda dari orang yang berbeda, dengan mempertimbangkan berbagai pekerjaan, perilaku pengambilan risiko yang berbeda, kebutuhan perlindungan dan asuransi yang berbeda, dan lokasi geografis dan batasan waktu yang berbeda.


But that is far from all. Besides diversification, the content and quality of the products would improve, too. Not only would the treatment of consumers by the employees of security enterprises improve immediately, the “I-could-care-less” attitude, the arbitrariness and even brutality, the negligence and tardiness of the present police and judicial systems would ultimately disappear. Since policemen and judges would be dependent on voluntary consumer support, any instances of maltreatment of consumers, of impoliteness or ineptness could cost them their job. Further, the peculiarity that the settlement of disputes between a client and his business partner is invariably entrusted to the latter’s judgment, would almost certainly disappear from the books, and conflict arbitration by independent parties would become the standard offered by producers of security. Most importantly, in order to attract and retain customers the producers of such services would have to offer contracts that would allow the consumer to know what he was buying and enable him to raise a valid, intersubjectively ascertainable complaint if the actual performance of the security producer did not live up to the contract. More specifically, insofar as they are not individualized service contracts where payment is made by a customer to cover his own risks exclusively but are rather insurance contracts that require pooling one’s own risks with those of other people, contrary to the present statist practice these contracts most certainly would no longer contain any deliberately built-in redistributive scheme favoring one group of people at the expense of another. Otherwise, if anyone had the feeling that the contract offered to him required him to pay for other people’s peculiar needs and risks—factors of possible insecurity, that is, that he did not perceive as applicable to his own case—he would simply reject signing it or discontinue his payments.

Tapi itu jauh dari semua. Selain diversifikasi, konten dan kualitas produk juga akan meningkat. Tidak hanya perlakuan konsumen oleh karyawan perusahaan keamanan segera diperbaiki, sikap "saya-yang-peduli-perawatan", kesewenang-wenangan dan bahkan kebrutalan, kelalaian dan keterlambatan sistem polisi dan peradilan sekarang akan lenyap. Karena polisi dan hakim bergantung pada dukungan konsumen sukarela, setiap kasus penganiayaan konsumen, ketidaksopanan atau ketidakmampuan bisa membebani pekerjaan mereka. Selanjutnya, keganjilan bahwa penyelesaian perselisihan antara klien dan rekan bisnisnya selalu dipercayakan pada putusan yang terakhir, hampir pasti akan hilang dari buku-buku, dan arbitrase konflik oleh pihak independen akan menjadi standar yang ditawarkan oleh produsen keamanan. Yang terpenting, untuk menarik dan mempertahankan pelanggan, produsen layanan semacam itu harus menawarkan kontrak yang memungkinkan konsumen mengetahui apa yang dia beli dan memungkinkannya mengajukan keluhan yang valid dan intersublikif jika kinerja produsen keamanan yang sebenarnya. tidak memenuhi kontrak. Lebih khusus lagi, sejauh kontrak layanan individual bukan kontrak dimana pembayaran dilakukan oleh pelanggan untuk menutupi risikonya sendiri secara eksklusif, tetapi lebih merupakan kontrak asuransi yang memerlukan penyatuan risiko sendiri dengan risiko orang lain, bertentangan dengan praktik statistik sekarang kontrak ini paling banyak. tentu tidak lagi mengandung skema redistributif built-in yang disengaja yang menguntungkan satu kelompok orang dengan mengorbankan orang lain. Jika tidak, jika ada yang merasa bahwa kontrak yang ditawarkan kepadanya mengharuskannya membayar kebutuhan dan faktor-resiko kemungkinan keresahan, yaitu, bahwa dia tidak menganggapnya sesuai dengan kasusnya sendiri-dia hanya akan menolak penandatanganan itu atau menghentikan pembayarannya.

Yet when all this is said, the question will inevitably surface. “Wouldn’t a competitive system of security production necessarily result in permanent social conflict, in chaos and anarchy?” Several responses can be made to this question. First, it should be noted that such an impression would by no means be in accordance with historical, empirical evidence. Systems of competing courts have existed at various places (e.g., in ancient Ireland or at the time of the Hanseatic League) before the arrival of the modern nation state, and as far as we know they worked well.[^27] Judged by the then existent crime rate (crime per capita), the private police in the so-called Wild West (which incidentally was not as wild as some movies imply) were relatively more successful than today’s state-supported police).[^28] And turning to contemporary experience and examples, millions and millions of international contracts exist even now—contracts of trade and travel—and it certainly seems to be an exaggeration to say, for instance, that there is more fraud, more crime, more breach of contract there than in domestic relations. And this, it should be noted, without there being one big monopolistic security producer and lawmaker. Finally it is not to be forgotten that even now in a great number of countries there are various private security producers alongside the state: private investigators, insurance detectives, and private arbitrators. Their work seems to confirm the thesis that they are more, not less, successful in resolving social conflicts than their public counterparts.

Namun saat semua ini dikatakan, pertanyaannya pasti akan muncul. "Bukankah sistem persaingan produksi keamanan harus menghasilkan konflik sosial permanen, dalam kekacauan dan anarki?" Beberapa tanggapan dapat diajukan untuk pertanyaan ini. Pertama, perlu dicatat bahwa kesan seperti itu sama sekali tidak sesuai dengan bukti historis dan empiris. Sistem pengadilan yang bersaing telah ada di berbagai tempat (misalnya di Irlandia kuno atau pada saat Liga Hanseatic) sebelum kedatangan negara bangsa yang modern, dan sejauh yang kita tahu mereka bekerja dengan baik.[^27] Dianggap oleh maka ada tingkat kriminalitas (kriminal per kapita), polisi swasta di Wild West (yang notawanya tidak liar seperti yang disiratkan beberapa film) relatif lebih berhasil daripada yang didukung oleh polisi saat ini).[^28] Dan berbalik Untuk pengalaman dan contoh kontemporer, jutaan dan jutaan kontrak internasional sekarang ada-kontrak perdagangan dan perjalanan-dan pastinya sangat berlebihan untuk dikatakan, misalnya, bahwa ada lebih banyak kecurangan, lebih banyak kejahatan, pelanggaran kontrak yang lebih banyak daripada dalam hubungan rumah tangga. Dan ini, perlu dicatat, tanpa ada satu produsen keamanan monopoli dan anggota parlemen yang besar. Akhirnya tidak boleh dilupakan bahwa bahkan sekarang di sejumlah besar negara terdapat berbagai produsen keamanan swasta di samping negara: penyidik pribadi, detektif asuransi, dan arbiter pribadi. Pekerjaan mereka terlihat mengkonfirmasi tesis bahwa mereka lebih, tidak kurang, berhasil dalam menyelesaikan konflik sosial daripada rekan-rekan publik mereka.

However, this historical evidence is very much subject to dispute, in particular regarding whether any general information can be derived from it. Yet there are systematic reasons, too, why the fear expressed by the question is not well-founded. Paradoxical as it may seem, establishing a competitive system of security producers implies erecting an institutionalized incentive structure to produce an order of law and law-enforcement that embodies the highest possible degree of consensus regarding the question of conflict resolution. Such a structure will tend to generate less rather than more social unrest and conflict than would occur under monopolistic auspices.[^29] In order to understand this paradox, it is necessary to take a closer look at the only typical situation that concerns the skeptic and that allows him to believe in the superior virtue of a monopolistically organized order of security production: when a conflict arises between A and B, both are insured by different companies and the companies cannot come to an immediate agreement regarding the validity of the conflicting claims brought forward by their respective clients. (No problem would exist if such an agreement were reached or if both clients were insured by one and the same company—at least the problem then would not be different in any way from that emerging under a statist monopoly.) Would not such a situation always result in a shoot-out? This is highly unlikely. First, any violent battle between companies would be costly and risky, in particular if these companies had reached a respectable size (which would be important for them to have in order to appear as effective guarantors of security to their prospective clients in the first place). More importantly, under a competitive system with each company dependent on the continuation of voluntary consumer payments, any battle would have to be deliberately supported by each and every client of both companies. If there were only one person who withdrew his payments because he was not convinced a battle was necessary in the particular conflict at hand, there would be immediate economic pressure on the company to look for a peaceful solution to the conflict.[^30] Hence any competitive producer of security would be extremely cautious about engaging in violent measures in order to resolve conflicts. Rather, to the extent that it is peaceful conflict resolution that consumers want, each and every security producer would go to great lengths to provide it to its clients and to establish in advance, for everyone to know, to what arbitration process it would be willing to submit itself and its clients in case of a disagreement over the evaluation of conflicting claims. And as such a scheme could appear to the clients of different firms to be working only if there were agreement among them regarding such arbitrational measures, a system of law governing relations between companies that would be universally acceptable to the clients of all of the competing security producers would naturally evolve. Moreover, the economic pressure to generate rules representing a consensus on how conflicts should be handled is even more farreaching. Under a competitive system, the independent arbitrators who would be entrusted with the task of finding peaceful solutions to conflicts would be dependent on the continued support of the two disputing companies insofar as the companies could and would select different judges if either one of them were sufficiently dissatisfied with the outcome of the arbitration work. Thus, these judges would be under pressure to find solutions to the problems handed over to them that, this time not with respect to the procedural aspects of law but its content, would be acceptable to all of the clients of the firms involved.[^31] Otherwise one or all of the companies might lose customers, thus inducing those firms to turn to different arbitrators the next time they are in need of one.[^32]

But wouldn’t it be possible under a competitive system for a security producing firm to become an outlaw company—a firm, that is, which, supported by its own clients, started aggressing against others? There is certainly no way to deny that this might be possible, though again it must be emphasized that here one is in the realm of empirical social science and no one could know such a thing with certainty. And yet the tacit implication that the possibility that a security firm could become an outlaw company somehow indicates a severe deficiency in the philosophy and economics of a pure capitalist social order is fallacious.[^33]

Tapi, bukankah mungkin di bawah sistem persaingan untuk membuat perusahaan pembuat keamanan menjadi perusahaan penjahat - sebuah perusahaan, yang didukung oleh kliennya sendiri, mulai melakukan agresi terhadap orang lain? Tentu tidak ada cara untuk menyangkal bahwa ini mungkin terjadi, lagi pula harus ditekankan bahwa di sini seseorang berada di ranah sains sosial empiris dan tidak ada yang tahu hal itu dengan pasti. Namun, implikasi diam-diam bahwa kemungkinan sebuah firma keamanan bisa menjadi perusahaan penjahat, bagaimanapun, mengindikasikan bahwa defisiensi filsafat dan ekonomi tatanan sosial kapitalis yang parah sangat keliru. [^33]

First, it should be recalled that any social system, a statist-socialist order no less than a pure market economy, is dependent for its continued existence on public opinion and that a given state of public opinion at all times delimits what can or cannot occur as well as what is more or less likely to occur. The current state of public opinion in West Germany, for instance, makes it highly unlikely or even impossible that a statist-socialist system of the current Soviet type could be imposed on the West German public. The lack of public support for such a system would doom it to failure and make it collapse. It is even more unlikely that any attempt to impose a Soviet-type order could ever hope to succeed among Americans, given American public opinion. Hence, in order for us to see the problem of outlaw companies correctly, the above question should be phrased as follows: How likely is it that any such event would occur in a given society with its specific state of public opinion? Formulated in this way, it is clear that the answer would have to be different for different societies. For some, characterized by socialist ideas deeply entrenched in the public, there would be a greater likelihood of the reemergence of aggressor companies, and for other societies there would be a much smaller chance of this happening. But then, would the prospect of a competitive system of security production in any given case be better or worse than that of the continuation of a statist system? Let us look, for instance, at the present-day United States. Assume that by a legislative act the state had abolished its right to provide security with tax funds and a competitive system of security production was introduced. Given the state of public opinion, how likely then would it be that outlaw producers would spring up, and what if they did? Evidently, the answer would depend on the reactions of the public to this changed situation. Thus, the first reply to those challenging the idea of a private market for security would have to be: What about you? What would your reaction be? Does your fear of outlaw companies mean that you would then go out and engage in trade with a security producer that aggressed against other people and their property, and would you continue supporting it if it did? Certainly the critic would be much muted by this counterattack. But more important than this is the systematic challenge implied in this personal counterattack. Evidently, the described change in the situation would imply a change in the cost-benefit structure that everyone would face once he had to make his decisions. Before the introduction of a competitive system of security production, it had been legal to participate in and support (state) aggression. Now such an activity would be illegal. Hence, given one’s conscience, which makes each decision appear more or less costly (i.e., more or less in harmony with one’s own principles of correct behavior), support for a firm engaging in the exploitation of people unwilling to deliberately support its actions would be more costly than before. Given this fact, it must be assumed that the number of people (including even those who otherwise would have readily lent their support to the state) who would now spend their money to support a firm committed to honest business would rise wherever this social experiment was tried. In contrast, the number of people still committed to a policy of exploitation—of gaining at the expense of others—would fall. How drastic this effect would be would of course depend on the state of public opinion. In the example at hand—the United States, where the natural theory of property is extremely widespread and accepted as a private ethic, the libertarian philosophy being essentially the ideology on which the country was founded and that led it to the height it reached[^34]—the effect would naturally be particularly pronounced. Accordingly, security producing firms committed to the philosophy of protecting and enforcing libertarian law would attract the greatest bulk of public support and financial assistance. And while it may be true that some people, and among them especially those who have profited from the old order, might continue their support of a policy of aggression, it is very unlikely that they would be sufficient in number and financial strength to succeed in doing so. Rather, the likely outcome would be that the honest companies would develop the strength needed—alone or in a combined effort and supported in this effort by their own voluntary customers—to check any such emergence of outlaw producers and destroy them wherever and whenever they came into existence.[^35]

[^26]: Sums up Molinari, *Production of Security,* pp. 13–14,

> If … the consumer is not free to buy security wherever he pleases, you forthwith see open up a large profession dedicated to arbitrariness and bad management. Justice becomes slow and costly, the police vexatious, individual liberty is no longer respected, the price of security is abusively inflated and inequitably apportioned, according to the power and influence of this or that class of consumers.

[^27]: See the literature cited in note 22; also Bruno Leoni, *Freedom and the Law* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1961); Joseph Peden, “Property Rights in Celtic Irish Law,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977).

[^28]: See Terry L. Anderson and Peter J. Hill, “The American Experiment in Anarcho-Capitalism: The *Not* So Wild, Wild West,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 1 (1980).

[^29]: On the following, see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1986), chap. 5.

[^30]: Contrast this with the state’s policy of engaging in battles without having everyone’s deliberate support because it has the right to tax people; and ask yourself if the risk of war would be lower or higher if one had the right to stop paying taxes as soon as one had the feeling that the states’ handling of foreign affairs was not to one’s liking.

[^31]: And it may be noted here again that norms that incorporate the highest possible degrees of consensus are, of course, those that are presupposed by argumentation and whose acceptance makes consensus on anything at all possible, as indicated above.

[^32]: Again, contrast this with state-employed judges who, because they are paid from taxes and so are relatively independent of consumer satisfaction, can pass judgments that are clearly not acceptable as fair by everyone; and ask yourself if the risk of not finding the truth in a given case would be lower or higher if one had the possibility of exerting economic pressure whenever one had the feeling that a judge who one day might have to adjudicate in one’s own case had not been sufficiently careful in assembling and judging the facts of a case, or simply was an outright crook.

[^33]: See on the following in particular Rothbard, *For A New Liberty*, pp. 233ff.

[^34]: See Bernard Bailyn, *The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); Jackson Turner Main, *The Anti-Federalists: Critics of the Constitution* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1961); Murray N. Rothbard, *Conceived in Liberty* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1975–1979).

[^35]: Naturally, insurance companies would assume a particularly important role in checking the emergence of outlaw companies. Note Morris and Linda Tannehill (*The Market of Liberty*, pp. 110–11):

> Insurance companies, a very important sector of any totally free economy, would have a special incentive to dissociate themselves from any aggressor and, in addition, to bring all their considerable business influence to bear against him. *Aggressive violence causes value loss*, and the insurance industry would suffer the major cost in most such value losses. An unrestrained aggressor is a walking liability, and no insurance company, however remotely removed from his original aggression, would wish to sustain the risk that he might aggress against one of its own clients next. Besides, aggressors and those who associate with them are more likely to be involved in situations of violence and are, thus, bad insurance risks. An insurance company would probably refuse coverage to such people out of a foresighted desire to minimize any future losses which their aggression might cause. But even if the company were not motivated by such foresight, it would still be forced to rate their premiums up drastically or cancel their coverage altogether in order to avoid carrying the extra risk invoked in their inclination to violence. In a competitive economy, no insurance company could afford to continue covering aggressors and those who had dealings with aggressors and simply pass the cost on to its honest customers; it would soon lose these customers to more reputable firms which could afford to charge less for their insurance coverage. 

> Perusahaan asuransi, sektor yang sangat penting dari ekonomi bebas manapun, akan memiliki insentif khusus untuk memisahkan diri dari agresor apapun dan, di samping itu, untuk membawa semua pengaruh bisnis mereka yang besar terhadapnya. *Kekerasan agresif menyebabkan kerugian nilai*, dan industri asuransi akan menanggung biaya utama dalam sebagian besar kerugian nilai tersebut. Penyerang tak terkendali adalah kewajiban berjalan, dan tidak ada perusahaan asuransi, yang terlepas dari agresi aslinya, ingin mempertahankan risiko bahwa dia mungkin akan melakukan agresi terhadap salah satu kliennya selanjutnya. Selain itu, penyerang dan mereka yang bergaul dengan mereka lebih cenderung terlibat dalam situasi kekerasan dan karena itu berisiko terhadap risiko asuransi yang buruk. Perusahaan asuransi mungkin menolak liputan kepada orang-orang semacam itu dari keinginan yang foresighted untuk meminimalkan kerugian di masa depan yang mungkin disebabkan oleh agresi mereka. Tetapi bahkan jika perusahaan tidak termotivasi oleh pandangan ke depan seperti itu, masih akan dipaksa untuk menilai premi mereka secara drastis atau membatalkan liputan mereka sama sekali untuk menghindari risiko tambahan yang diajukan karena kecenderungan kekerasan mereka. Dalam ekonomi yang kompetitif, tidak ada perusahaan asuransi yang mampu melanjutkan pelepasan agresor dan mereka yang telah berurusan dengan agresor dan hanya meneruskan biaya kepada pelanggannya yang jujur; akan segera kehilangan pelanggan ini ke perusahaan yang lebih memiliki reputasi baik yang mampu mengenakan biaya lebih rendah untuk cakupan asuransi mereka.
