Kegagalan Selgin dan White untuk mengenali ini, dan kepercayaan mereka terhadap kelalaian etis dari perbankan cadangan, disebabkan oleh dua kebingungan. Di satu sisi, seperti yang telah ditunjukkan, mereka tidak menyadari bahwa tidak ada objek - dan tidak ada jumlah uang (emas) - dapat dimiliki lebih dari satu partai pada satu waktu dan bahwa tidak ada kontrak yang dapat meningkatkan jumlah properti dalam keberadaan, dan dengan demikian bahwa pretensi apapun yang bertentangan secara inheren bersifat curang. Di sisi lain, dan terkait erat, Selgin dan White tidak mengenali perbedaan praksiologis mendasar antara judul properti dan properti. Sebaliknya, dengan memasukkan uang (emas) dan uang pengganti (uang kertas) dengan judul "uang" yang sama, mereka terus-menerus menyamarkan perbedaan ini. Karena jika uang (emas) dan gelar uang (uang kertas) keduanya didefinisikan sebagai "uang", maka memang tampaknya mengikuti bahwa tidak ada bedanya apakah persediaan uang atau uang kertas meningkat. Keduanya "uang" dan karenanya, menurut definisi, dalam kedua kasus peristiwa yang sama - peningkatan pasokan uang - telah terjadi. Tapi ini tidak mengubah fakta; itu hanya mendefinisikan mereka dari keberadaan.

Tentu saja, seperti yang diketahui Selgin dan White, setiap orang bebas untuk menerapkan definisi apapun dan membuat perbedaan yang dia inginkan. Namun definisi tidak menciptakan perbedaan nyata; mereka bisa, meskipun, membuat mereka menghilang. Mereka hanya bisa mencerminkan perbedaan semacam itu atau mengabaikan dan membingungkan mereka; dan dengan jelas, untuk merujuk pada uang dan uang pengganti tanpa pandang bulu karena uang adalah untuk mengaburkan perbedaan antara dua fenomena kategoris yang berbeda secara praksis dan keadaan. Sebuah judul untuk uang dan kenaikan judul tidak sama dengan uang dan kenaikan uang. Sebaliknya, tidak seperti peningkatan jumlah uang (emas) atau kenaikan judul yang didukung oleh kenaikan uang yang sesuai, kenaikan jumlah judul uang tanpa didukung oleh jumlah uang yang meningkat tentu menyiratkan bahwa satu dan jumlah yang sama Uang dimiliki lebih dari satu orang pada saat bersamaan; dan karena hal semacam itu secara fisik tidak mungkin - jumlah uang tidak berubah dan semua uang yang ada sekarang dimiliki oleh beberapa penebusan satu gelar fidusia, maka, baik itu uang atau bentuk properti riil lainnya, melibatkan sebuah tindakan perampasan gelap.

Asumsikan ada properti dan judul properti (notes). Selain barang dalam barang konsumsi, barang produsen, dan uang, judul barang konsumsi, judul barang produksi, dan judul uang diasumsikan ada. Asal-usul judul properti di samping keberadaan properti itu sendiri mempromosikan kepastian hukum dan mengurangi dan memfasilitasi perselisihan hukum, dan karenanya tidak diragukan lagi merupakan pengembangan yang menguntungkan (alami). Selain itu, memungkinkan dua inovasi. Di satu sisi, menjadi mungkin untuk memisahkan tindakan mentransfer kepemilikan properti dari tindakan pengalihan kepemilikannya. Artinya, menjadi mungkin untuk menyerah atau memperoleh kepemilikan di objek tanpa menyerahkan atau melepaskan kepemilikan, disposisi, dan penguasaan objek yang sama secara bersamaan. Diterapkan pada uang, mungkin sementara itu, sementara kepemilikan jumlah uang (emas) yang ada dapat berubah terus-menerus dari satu orang ke orang lain, seluruh jumlah uang mungkin tetap ada - tidak berubah - di tangan satu dan bank yang sama ( sebagai pengelola uang yang dimiliki orang lain). Di sisi lain, dengan pengembangan judul properti, pertukaran antarwaktu akan difasilitasi secara sistematis. Properti atau hak yang ada (sekarang) dapat ditransfer dengan imbalan hak atas properti masa depan (klaim hutang); dan karenanya juga diasumsikan bahwa di samping judul pada properti yang ada (barang konsumsi, barang produsen, dan uang), judul (klaim hutang) untuk barang konsumen masa depan, barang produsen masa depan, dan uang masa depan ada dan diperdagangkan juga.

Sehubungan dengan perkembangan tersebut, berikut transaksi (kontrak) antara dua pihak A (bank client) dan B (bank) dimungkinkan. A dapat mentransfer uangnya (emas) ke dalam disposisi B dan oleh karena itu (1) * tidak * melepaskan kepemilikannya di dalamnya, atau (2) melepaskan kepemilikannya. Tidak ada kemungkinan ketiga *. Jika (1), maka A menyimpan judul sejumlah uang yang ditransfer ke B; B tidak memiliki judul untuk itu, tapi bertindak sebagai pergudangan uang (bailee) untuk A (sebagai money bailor). * Tidak ada kemungkinan ketiga *. Jika (2), maka B memperoleh hak atas jumlah uang yang dimasukkan ke dalam disposisinya oleh A; A menerima dari B sebagai imbalan baik (a) jumlah barang konsumen dan / atau barang yang ada sekarang yang dimiliki dan dimiliki oleh B; atau (b) sebutan untuk barang konsumen dan / atau barang produksi yang ada sekarang di dalam kepemilikan B (namun dimiliki oleh A) (klaim ekuitas); atau (c) suatu judul untuk jumlah barang konsumen dan / atau barang konsumen masa depan dan / atau uang (klaim hutang). Sekali lagi, * tidak ada kemungkinan ketiga *. Artinya, A tidak dapat mempertahankan kepemilikan properti ini dan memindahkannya ke B.

Di antara semua kemungkinan transaksi, tidak satu pun akan menghasilkan catatan fidusia. Media fidusia, menurut definisi Selgin dan White sendiri, adalah "bagian pengganti uang yang dapat ditebus yang didukung oleh aset selain uang primer." [10] Ada uang (emas) dan uang pengganti (sebanding dengan uang) yang ada, dan ada judul barang non-uang (judul ekuitas), dan judul untuk barang masa depan yang belum ada (klaim hutang). Rupanya, bagaimanapun, tidak ada yang namanya "pengganti uang yang didukung oleh aset selain uang primer" akan timbul dari transaksi-transaksi ini. Selgin dan White * menganggap * adanya media fidusia (dan mereka hanya menganggap bahwa tidak adanya media fidusia harus merupakan hasil dari pembatasan hukum), namun tidak memberikan penjelasan praxeologis dan rekonstruksi asal-usul yang aneh entitas dan keadaan. Sebaliknya, mereka hanya bertanya, mengapa tidak? "Kami tidak melihat mengapa bank dan pelanggan tidak dapat secara kontraktual setuju untuk menjadikannya hutang [yaitu, giro dan uang kertas] dan bukan penerimaan gudang." * Mengapa * apakah itu bisa - dan seharusnya - bukan pengganti uang yang didukung oleh aset selain uang? Untuk alasan yang sama, ada dan tidak boleh ada judul mobil atau rumah yang didukung oleh aset selain mobil atau rumah, yang boleh dan tidak boleh ada judul ekuitas yang didukung oleh aset selain ekuitas, dan mungkin juga ada dan tidak ada aset - uang, ekuitas, atau hutang yang dimiliki (didukung) oleh lebih dari satu orang pada satu waktu. Judul untuk uang adalah-dan harus didukung oleh uang dengan cara yang sama dan karena alasan yang sama seperti judul untuk mobil dan harus didukung oleh mobil. Inilah yang mendefinisikan mereka sebagai judul properti. Hal ini sesuai dengan dan cerminan sifat dari property dan property title. Berbeda sekali, sebuah judul untuk uang yang didukung oleh aset selain uang adalah kontradiksi dalam hal, dan masalah dan penggunaannya melibatkan pernyataan keliru yang sama seperti isu judul sebuah mobil yang didukung oleh aset selain mobil (bagian dari pesawat terbang dan sepeda, misalnya). [^ 11]

The answer to why fractional reserve agreements are ethically impermissible, and why there can be no contracts to make warehouse receipts debt, is that such agreements and contracts contradict (deny) the nature of things. Any such contract is from the outset—a priori—invalid. Selgin and White try to get around this inescapable conclusion by adopting, wittingly or not, an ultra-subjectivist view of contracts and agreements. According to this view, the very fact that a voluntary agreement is reached and/or a contract is concluded demonstrates that it must be a valid—true or permissible—agreement and contract. Yet this view is not only false, it is also incompatible with Rothbard’s title-transfer theory of contract that these authors claim to have accepted. Agreements and contracts per se do not imply anything regarding their validity for the fundamental reason that agreements and contracts do not create reality, but rather presuppose it. More specifically, contracts do not bring property into existence, but rather recognize and transfer existing property. Hence, as in Rothbard’s ethical system, the theory of property must precede the treatment of contracts. Contracts and contract theory presuppose and are constrained by property and property theory. That is, the range of possible (valid) contracts is limited and restricted by the existing quantity (stock) of property and the nature of things, rather than the other way around. Thus, agreements regarding flying elephants, centaurs, squared circles, of *perpetui mobile*, for instance, are invalid contracts. They cannot—by virtue of biological, physical, or mathematical law—be fulfilled, and are from the outset false and fraudulent.

While Selgin and White may acknowledge this, they fail to recognize that a fractional reserve banking agreement implies no lesser an impossibility and fraud than that involved in the trade of flying elephants or squared circles. In fact, the impossibility involved in fractional reserve banking is even greater. For, whereas the impossibility of contracts regarding flying elephants, for instance, is merely a contingent and empirical one (it is not inconceivable that in another possible world, somewhere and sometime, flying elephants may actually exist, thus making such contracts possible), the impossibility of fractional reserve banking contracts is a necessary and categorical one. That is, it is inconceivable—praxeologically impossible—that a bank and a customer can agree to make money substitutes (banknotes, demand deposit accounts) debts instead of warehouse receipts. They may say or certify otherwise, of course, just as one may say that triangles are squares. But what they say would be objectively false. As triangles would remain triangles and be different from squares, so money substitutes would still be money substitutes (titles to present money) and be distinct from debt claims (titles to not yet existing future goods) and equity claims (titles to existing property other than money). To say otherwise does not change reality but objectively misrepresents it.

In doing what Selgin and White believe clients and banks to have done—to agree to make warehouse receipts debt—the money depositor A receives from the bank B a claim to present money, rather than a debtor equity title. That is, A does not in fact give up ownership of the deposited money (as would have been the case if he had received a debtor equity claim from B). While A retains title to the money deposit, however, B does not treat A’s deposit as a bailment, but rather as a loan, and enters it as an asset onto its own (B’s) balance sheet (offset by an equal sum of outstanding demand liabilities). While this may appear initially to be merely a harmless accounting practice, it involves from the outset a misrepresentation of the real state of affairs.[^12] Since both, B as well as A, count the same quantity of money simultaneously among their own assets, they have in effect conspired to represent themselves in their financial accounts as owning a larger quantity of property than they actually own: that is, they have become financial impostors.[^13] Though fraudulent, this would not matter so much if everything were left at this. However, as soon as B acts as if things were the way he represents them on his balance sheet to be—as if the bank owned the deposited money and only had the obligation to redeem outstanding warehouse receipts on demand—mere misrepresentation is turned into misappropriation. If B, in accordance with this misrepresentation, lends out money, or more likely, issues additional warehouse receipts for money and lends these out to some third party C, in the expectation of eventually being repaid principal and interest, the bank becomes engaged in undue appropriation, because what it lends out to C—whether money or titles to money—is in fact not its (B’s) own property but that of someone else (A). It is this fact—that the title transferred from B to C concerns property B does not own—that makes fractional reserve banking from the outset fraudulent.

It is not the case, as is claimed, that fraud (breach of contract) is committed only if B, the fractional reserve bank, is actually unable to fulfill all requests for redemption as they arise. Rather, fraud is also committed each time B does fulfill its redemption obligations. Because whenever B redeems a fractionally covered banknote into money (gold) (whenever a note holder takes possession of his property), it does so with someone else’s money: if B redeems C’s note, it does so with money owned by A, and if A wants his money too, B pays him with money owned by D, and so on. Qua defenders of fiduciary media and fractional reserve banking, Selgin and White would have to maintain that there is no breach of contract as long as B is able to fulfill its contractual obligations with *someone else’s* property (money).

Yet this is patently wrong, and it stands in clear contradiction to Rothbard’s title transfer theory of contract that Selgin and White claim to have accepted. In accordance with Rothbard’s contract theory, individuals are only entitled to make contracts regarding the transfer of *their own property*. In contrast, fractional reserve banking, by its very nature (even if it is practiced successfully), involves contracts concerning the transfer of *other people’s property*. Hence this practice—the issue of fiduciary media—is in principle (inherently) incompatible with the title-transfer theory of contract—and it turns out, not surprisingly, that it is Rothbard, and not his two interpreters, who ultimately demonstrates a better grasp of his own contract theory.

[^10]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 85.

[^11]: Similar logic-semantic confusions are at work when Selgin and White try to reduce the difference between demand and time liabilities to one of degree rather than kind (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 90). Explains Selgin:

> Holders of demand liabilities are granters of credit just as are holders of time liabilities. The only difference is that in the former case the duration of individual loans is unspecified; they are “call loans” that may mature at any time;

and “Mises,” who holds the opposite view, “confuses a difference of degree with one of substance” (Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 62). In fact, it is Selgin who is confused.

To be sure, one might say that it is only a matter of degree whether a loan (of a car or of money) matures in an hour, a day, a week, or a month. Just as surely, however, this does not change the categorical distinction between present—existing—goods and not (yet) existing future goods. At any point in time, a car or a sum of money (gold) either exists or it does not exist. Nor does it alter the praxeological datum that no one, at any time, can act with anything except present goods. Future goods are the goal of actions, but in order to attain them, every actor must first invariably employ present means goods. Nor does Selgin’s observation concerning degrees of time affect in the slightest the fundamental human condition of scarcity. The supply of present goods is at all times limited, and the limited quantity of present goods limits in turn the quantity of possible future goods.

Whereas Mises recognizes the distinction between present goods and future goods as a universal praxeological category, Selgin’s attempt to conflate demand and time deposits (thus distinguish himself fundamentally from Mises) implies a denial that there is no such fundamental difference between present (existing) goods and future (not-existing) goods (or that their existence differs only in degrees). Contrary to Selgin, it is not a matter of degree but rather one of substance whether a car or a sum of money presently exists or not, and whether one person or someone else owns them. Either they exist or they don’t exist, and either A owns them or someone else does. Accordingly if a property title (demand deposit note) then states that one person is the owner of a present car or present money and no car or money exists, or the car or money is presently owned by someone else, this does not represent a degree of truth but a falsehood. Explains Mises:

> A depositor of a sum of money who acquires in exchange for it a claim convertible into money at any time which will perform exactly the same service for him as the sum it refers to has exchanged no present good for a future good. The claim that he has acquired by his deposit is also a present good for him. The depositing of money in no way means that he has renounced immediate disposal over the utility that it commands. (*The Theory of Money and Credit,* p. 268)

See also the two following notes.

[^12]: See on this point Rothbard. “How,” asks Rothbard,

> do these warehouse receipt transactions relate to the T-account balance sheets of the deposit banks? In simple justice, not at all. When I store a piece of furniture worth $5,000 in warehouse, in law and in justice the furniture does *not* show up as an asset of the warehouse during the time that I keep it there. The warehouse does not add $5,000 to both its assets and liabilities because it in no sense *owns* the furniture; neither can we say that I have *loaned* the warehouse the furniture for some indefinite time period. The furniture is mine and remains mine; I am only keeping it there for safekeeping and therefore I am legally and morally entitled to redeem it any time I please. I am not therefore the bank’s “creditor”; it doesn’t *owe* me money which I may some day collect. Hence, there is no debt to show up on the Equity + Liability side of the ledger. Legally, the entire transaction is not a loan but a *bailment*. (*The Mystery of Banking* [New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983], pp. 88–89)

Interestingly, while Selgin and White manifest a strong positivistic tendency (fractional reserve banking is recognized by the courts, so it must be all right; on this tendency see “The Issue of Fraud III” below), they do not come to terms with legal reality. For if money deposits are debt, why, then, don’t the courts apply the same reasoning to all other fungible commodities such as wheat? Why are wheat warehouse receipts not considered a debt but a bailment by the courts? Why is this treatment peculiar to money and the banking business? Moreover, why is it that the courts, even if they falsely consider money deposits as debts, still insist that they are more than an ordinary debt, and the depositor’s relation to the bank is not identical with that of an ordinary creditor? See Rothbard, *Mystery of Banking*, p. 275.

[^13]: See also William Stanley Jevons (*Money and the Mechanism of Exchange* [London: Kegan Paul, 1905], pp. 206–12, 221), who lamented the existence of general deposits since it has “become possible to create a fictitious supply of a commodity, that is, to make people believe that a supply exists which does not exist.” On the other hand, special deposits, such as “bills of lading, pawn-tickets, dock-warrants, or certificates which establish ownership to a definite object,” are superior because “they cannot possibly be issued in excess of the good actually deposited, unless by distinct fraud.” And Jevons concluded that “it used to be held as a general rule of law, that a present grantor assignment of goods not in existence is without operation.”
