# 引言

托马斯.杰斐逊证实了《美国独立宣言》所说

> 真理是不辩自明的：人生来平等；造物主赋予人类不可剥夺的权利；其中包括生存，自由，对幸福的追求：为了保障这些权利，政府在人类中建立起来，权利来自被统治者的许可；不管什么样的政府，只要危害到人民的这些权利，人们就有权利改变或者废除这些政府，并建立起新政府，人们以这样的原则为基石，并以似乎最能影响到他们的安全和幸福的形式组织权利。 为了谨慎起见，成立多年的政府不应当因为轻微的一时的原因而改变；因此，所有经验表明，在罪恶可容忍时人们更倾向于忍受，而不是通过废除他们已习惯的形式来纠正。 当有一连串滥用职权和强取豪夺始终追求同一目标，这表明一个会使它们沦落到极其专制统治下的计划，他们有义务为了他们未来的安全稳定提供新保卫而推翻这样的政府，这是他们的权利。

在提出独立宣言的两百年后，提出这个问题似乎是恰如其分的：政府是否已按所设计地行事，经验或是理论已经有根有据地为我们提出了考虑我们未来的安全稳定的更有效的保障。 本卷旨在问答这个基本问题。 事实上，最近由于2001年9月11日发生的事件让这个问题呈现出新的紧迫感。 政府应该保护我们远离恐怖主义。 然而，美国在政府在恐怖分子袭击世界贸易中心和五角大楼中起了什么作用？ 美国政府命令每年要有十亿美元的国防预算，它的总数等于24个最大政府支出国年度国防预算之和。 它雇佣全球范围内的间谍和告密者。 然而，它无法阻止商业客机被劫持，并被用作对抗杰出公民和军事目标的导弹。 更糟糕的是，美国政府不仅没能阻止9月11日的灾难，事实上促成了这一事件发生的可能性。 奉行干涉主义的外交政策（在一百多个国家采取经济制裁，驻扎部队，无情地轰炸，扶持专制政权，在无法解决的土地问题和民族纠纷中偏袒，或试图在全球范围内进行军政管理），政府给外国恐怖分子提供了十足的动机，也让美国成为了他们的首要目标。 此外，如果士兵们只装备了几把刀，那么他们会造成多么可怕的伤害呢? 显然，这是可能的，因为政府禁止航空公司和飞行员用武力保护自己的财产，从而使每一家商业航空公司都容易受到侵害，免受劫机者的侵害。在驾驶舱里，一支价值50美元的手枪可能已经完成了政府手中4000亿美元无法做到的事情。从这些失败中吸取了什么教训？在事件发生后，美国的外交政策更加积极地进行干预和威胁。美军推翻阿富汗政府，被说成是“窝藏”的恐怖分子 Osama bin Laden (奥萨马•本•拉登)。在这一过程中，数千无辜平民被杀害为“附带损害”，但斌拉扥没有被抓获或惩罚到今天，几乎两年后的攻击。美国政府一旦在阿富汗安装，美国政府就把注意力转向与其他敌国，特别是拥有巨大石油储备的伊拉克的战争。美国甚至拒绝排除对付敌方政权的核武器。毫无疑问，这一政策有助于进一步将新兵人数提高到愿意对美国采取极端暴力作为报复手段的人群中。与此同时，国内政府利用危机，煽动进一步增加自己的权力，牺牲人民的自由和财产权利。政府支出，尤其是“防务”的支出大大增加，新的“国土安全”政府部门也建立起来了。机场安全由联邦政府和政府官员接管，并采取了一个完整的电子公民监督的决定性步骤。那么，事实上，当前的事件迫切需要对国防和安全问题进行系统的重新思考，以及政府、市场和社会在提供这些问题方面各自的作用。



* * *

Two of the most widely accepted propositions among political economists and political philosophers are the following: First: Every “monopoly” is “bad” from the viewpoint of consumers. Monopoly here is understood in its classical sense as an exclusive privilege granted to a single producer of a commodity or service; i.e., as the absence of “free entry” into a particular line of production. In other words, only one agency, A, may produce a given good, x. Any such monopolist is “bad” for consumers because, shielded from potential new entrants into his area of production, the price of his product x will be higher and the quality of x lower than otherwise. Second, the production of security must be undertaken by and is the primary function of government. Here, security is understood in the wide sense adopted in the Declaration of Independence: as the protection of life, property (liberty), and the pursuit of happiness from domestic violence (crime) as well as external (foreign) aggression (war). In accordance with generally accepted terminology, government is defined as a territorial monopoly of law and order (the ultimate decision maker and enforcer). That both propositions are clearly incompatible has rarely caused concern among economists and philosophers, and in so far as it has, the typical reaction has been one of taking exception to the first proposition rather than the second. The contributors to this volume challenge this “orthodox” view and offer both empirical and theoretical support to the contrary thesis: that it is the second proposition, not the first, which is false and ought to be rejected. As far as empirical—historical—evidence is concerned, proponents of the orthodox view face obvious embarrassment. The recently ended twentieth century was characterized by a level of human rights violations unparalleled in all of human history. In his book Death by Government, Rudolph Rummel estimates some 170 million government-caused deaths in the twentieth century. The historical evidence appears to indicate that, rather than protecting life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness of their citizens, governments must be considered the greatest threat to human security. Proponents of the orthodox view (willing to compromise the first thesis regarding the “evil” of monopoly in order to maintain the second concerning the necessity of state government) cannot entirely ignore this seemingly overwhelming evidence to the contrary. If they wish to rescue from refutation the thesis that government is indispensible for the provision of law and order, they must revise the second thesis. Experience shows that some states are aggressors, not protectors. Thus, if one is not to discard the second thesis altogether, its further specification is required: it is only possible to claim that some states protect. Accordingly, rather than faulting government as such for the dismal security record in particular during the past century, several attempts have been made to explain this record as the result of specific forms of government. Numerous political scientists, including the aforementioned Rummel, have tried to show by various statistical means that it is the absence of democratic government which explains the “anomalies” of the twentieth century. Admittedly, democracies go to war against nondemocratic regimes, but supposedly not against other democracies. Hence, it would seem to follow—and this thesis has in the meantime become part of the American neoconservative folklore—that once the Wilsonian dream of “making the world safe for democracy” has been achieved, eternal peace and security will be accomplished. In a similar vein, political economists such as James Buchanan and the school of “constitutional economics” have suggested that the admittedly miserable record of governments concerning the provision of internal and external security can be systematically improved by means of constitutional reforms aimed at the strict limitation of governmental powers. Both these explanations are scrutinized and rejected in this volume. As for the thesis of the peaceful nature of democracy, several contributors note that, in accordance with military historians such as J.F.C. Fuller and M. Howard, it rests on a rather selective or even erroneous reading of the historical record. Let me mention only two such misreadings. First, how can this thesis account for a seemingly obvious counterexample such as the American War of Southern Independence (the War Between the States) with its until then unparalleled brutality? Answer: by excluding and ignoring it or downplaying its significance. Second, proponents of the peaceful-democracy thesis typically support their claim by classifying traditional monarchies and modern dictatorships as autocratic and nondemocratic and contrasting both to what they classify as genuine “democracies.” Yet historically (and if any grouping must be done at all), it is democracy and dictatorship that should be grouped together. Traditional monarchies only resemble dictatorships superficially. Instead, dictatorships are a regular outgrowth of mass democracy. Lenin, Stalin, Hitler, and Mao were distinctly democratic rulers as compared to the former Emperors of Russia, Germany, Austria, and China. Indeed, Lenin, Stalin, Hitler, and Mao (and almost all of their smaller and lesser known successors) were outspoken in their hatred of everything monarchic and aristocratic. They knew that they owed their rise to democratic mass politics, and they employed democratic politics (elections, referenda, mass rallies, mass media propaganda, etc.) throughout their reign. On the other hand, as for the proposal of constitutional reforms aimed at limiting state power, several contributors to this volume explain that any such attempts must be considered futile and ineffective if and insofar as the interpretation and the enforcement of such limitations is left to government itself or to one of its organs, such as a governmental supreme court. (See more on this below.) More convincing to the contributors of this volume appears a third thesis, advanced by the economist Ludwig von Mises, which may be considered a combination of the above. Mises asserts that in order to fulfill its primary function as a provider of security, a government must satisfy two conditions: it must be democratically organized, and it must permit unlimited secession in principle.

> Whenever the inhabitants of a particular territory, whether it be a single village, a whole district, or a series of adjacent districts, make it known, by a freely conducted plebiscite, that they no longer wish to remain united to the state to which they belong at the time, their wishes are to be respected and complied with. This is the only feasible and effective way of preventing revolutions and international wars. (Ludwig von Mises, *Liberalism* [Irvington-on-Hudson, New York: Foundation for Economic Education, and San Francisco, Calif.: Cobden Press, 1985], p. 109)

One obvious attraction of this thesis is that it can account for the events of the American War of Southern Independence. Thus, until 1861, it was generally taken for granted in the U.S. that a right to secession existed, and that the Union was nothing but a voluntary association of independent states; but when the desire for the unrestricted right to secede was no longer respected, the state turned from protector to aggressor. Mises’s thesis is accorded considerable attention in this volume, and the role of secession as a means for limiting or escaping government depredation is emphasized repeatedly. However, in requiring a protective state to allow unlimited secession from its jurisdiction, Mises’s explanation essentially renders the State a voluntary membership organization with taxes amounting to voluntarily paid (or withheld) membership dues. With an unlimited right to secession even at the level of individual households, the government is no longer a “State,” but a club. Hence, strictly speaking, Mises’s thesis must be considered a rejection of proposition two rather than merely its revision. The contributors to this volume concur with this judgment, not only for empirical reasons but even more so for theoretical ones. Every attempt to explain the dismal performance of governments (States) qua providers of security as inherent in the nature of state-government must begin with a precise definition of state-government (the State). The definition of the State adopted throughout this volume is uncontroversial. It corresponds closely to that proposed by Thomas Hobbes and adopted to this day by countless political philosophers and economists. Briefly, Hobbes argued that in the state of nature, men would constantly be at each others’ throats. *Homo homini lupus est*. Each individual, left to his own devices and provisions, would spend too little on his own defense. Hence, permanent interpersonal warfare would result. The solution to this presumably intolerable situation, according to Hobbes and his followers, is the institution of a State (government). In order to institute peaceful cooperation—security—among themselves, two individuals, A and B, require a third independent party, S, as ultimate judge and peacemaker. However, this third party, S, is not just another individual, and the good provided by S, that of security, is not just another “private” good. Rather, S is a sovereign and has as such two unique powers. On the one hand, S can insist that his subjects, A and B, not seek protection from anyone but him; that is, S is a compulsory territorial monopolist of protection and ultimate decision making (jurisdiction). On the other hand, S can determine unilaterally (without unanimous consent) how much A and B must spend on their own security; that is, S has the power to impose taxes in order to provide security “collectively.” Based on this definition of government as a compulsory territorial monopolist of protection and jurisdiction equipped with the power to tax without unanimous consent, the contributors to this volume argue that, regardless of whether such a government is a monarchy, a democracy, or a dictatorship, any notion of limiting its power and safeguarding individual life, liberty, and property must be deemed illusory. Under monopolistic auspices the price of justice and protection must rise and its quality must fall. A tax-funded protection agency, it is pointed out, is a contradiction in terms: it is an expropriating property protector and can only lead to ever more taxes and less protection. In fact, even if a state limited its activities exclusively to the protection of life, liberty, and property (as a protective state à la Jefferson would do), the further question of how much security to provide would arise. Motivated like everyone else by selfinterest and the disutility of labor, but with the unique power to tax without consent, a government’s answer will always be the same: to maximize expenditures on protection—and almost all of a nation’s wealth can be consumed by the cost of protection—and at the same time to minimize the production of protection. Furthermore, a monopoly of jurisdiction must lead to a deterioration in the quality of justice and protection. If one can appeal only to the State for justice and protection, justice and protection will be distorted in favor of government—constitutions and supreme courts notwithstanding. After all, constitutions and supreme courts are state constitutions and courts, and whatever limitations to government action they might contain is determined by agents of the very same institution. Accordingly, the definitions of life, liberty, and property and their protection will continually be altered and the range of jurisdiction expanded to the state’s advantage. The first person to provide a systematic explanation for the apparent failure of governments as security producers along the above sketched lines was Gustave de Molinari (1818–1912), a prominent Belgian-born French economist, student of JeanBaptiste Say, and teacher of Vilfredo Pareto, and for several decades the editor of the *Journal des Économistes*, the professional journal of the French Economic Association, *the Societé d’Économie Politique*. De Molinari’s central argument was laid out in his article “De la Production de la Securité” of February 1849. The argument is worth quoting because of its theoretical rigor and its seemingly visionary foresight:

> If there is one well-established truth in political economy, it is this: That in all cases, for all commodities that serve to provide for the tangible or intangible needs of consumers, it is in the consumer’s best interest that labor and trade remain free, because the freedom of labor and trade have as their necessary and permanent result the maximum reduction of price. And this: That the interests of the consumer of any commodity whatsoever should always prevail over the interests of the producer. Now in pursuing these principles, one arrives at this rigorous conclusion: That the production of security should, in the interests of the consumers of this intangible commodity, remain subject to the law of free competition. Whence it follows: That no government should have the right to prevent another government from going into competition with it, or require consumers of security to come exclusively to it for this commodity... Either this is logically true, or else the principles on which economic science is based are invalid. (Gustave de Molinari, *Production of Security*, J.H. McCulloch, trans. [New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, 1977], pp. 3–4)

De Molinari then predicted what would happen if the production of security is monopolized:

> If, on the contrary, the consumer is not free to buy security wherever he pleases, you forthwith see open up a large profession dedicated to arbitrariness and bad management. Justice becomes slow and costly, the police vexatious, individual liberty is no longer respected, the price of security is abusively inflated and inequitably apportioned, according to the power and influence of this or that class of consumers. (Molinari, *Production of Security*, pp. 13–14)

Nearly all contributors to this volume pay explicit tribute to Molinari’s pathbreaking theoretical insight. Hence, the present volume is dedicated to the memory of Gustave de Molinari. If Molinari’s explanation of the dismal performance of government as security provider by the nature of government qua compulsory territorial monopolist of law and order is accepted, however, then the question of alternatives arises. Accordingly, the bulk of this volume consists of contributions to this quest for private and voluntary (market-produced) alternatives to the failed and fundamentally flawed system of state-protection. How could and would an alternative system of freely competing security producers work? Based on historical experience and economic logic, how effective are private alternatives such as mercenaries, guerrillas, militias, partisans, and privateers? What are the consequences of the free proliferation of weapons, in particular of nuclear arms? What is the role of ideology and public opinion in defense and war? What type of good is defense, a “private” or a “public” good? Can protective defense be provided by freely competing and financed insurance agencies? How would the “logic” of competitive insurance-protection differ from that of monopolistic state-protection? How can the transition from a system of monopolistic to competitive security production be achieved? What is the role of secession in this process? How can state-free societies—natural orders—possibly defend themselves against state attacks and invasions? These are the central questions addressed and answered in the present volume by an international assembly of contributors from philosophy, economics, history, sociology, and political science.

* * *

The contributions to Section One on state-making and warmaking set the stage historically and conceptually. Marco Bassani and Carlo Lottieri locate the topic and theme of the volume in history and the history of political thought. They emphasize the historical modernity of the institution of a State—States have not always existed—and direct particular attention to medieval (feudal) Europe as an example of a “Society without State,” from which valuable insights regarding the present and its possible paths of transformation can be gained. They explain the ideological revolution, associated with such names as Machiavelli, Bodin, Hobbes, and Rousseau, that supported and led up to the rise of the State. They review the rise of a liberal-libertarian ideological opposition to Statism, associated in particular with the names of Molinari (in the nineteenth century) and Rothbard (in the twentieth). They note the importance of European “realism,” i.e., the “elitist” social theorists such as G. Mosca, V. Pareto, and R. Michels in Italy and Carl Schmitt in Germany, for a correct understanding of the “non-neutral” nature of the State and sovereignty. And they explore the prospects for liberty and protection in the current world torn between a tendency toward political centralization (a One World Order) and an opposite tendency toward decentralization and secession. Murray N. Rothbard (1926–1995), the author of the second contribution to Section One, is the most important twentiethcentury disciple of Molinari. In synthesizing Molinari’s monopoly (or rather antimonopoly) theory with Ludwig von Mises’s neo-Austrian system of free-market economics (praxeology) and natural-law ethics, Rothbard created a grand new anti-Statist theoretical system, of Austro-Libertarianism. As they were by Molinari, most contributors to this volume have been profoundly influenced by Rothbard and his system. In his contribution to this volume, published originally in 1963 and reprinted here with the permission of the Ludwig von Mises Institute, Rothbard introduces the conceptual and terminological distinctions fundamental to all of the following. He clarifies the meaning of property, aggression, crime, selfdefense, punishment, State, peace, war (“just” and “unjust”), revolution, imperialism, neutrality, and isolationism, and he explains the inherently aggressive nature of the State, i.e., the indissoluble link between War-Making and State-Making. The contributions to Section Two focus on the subject of government forms, war, and strategy. Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn (1909–1999), in the last article completed before his death, presents a sweeping portrait of European history and the role of monarchy and Christian kings. In the European-Christian worldview, the king was seen as part of a natural, quasi-familial hierarchical or “vertical” social order: of “God the Father in Heaven, the Holy Father in Rome, the King as the Father of the Fatherland, and the Father as the King in the Family.” He describes the gradual deconstruction of this vertical worldview and its displacement, beginning with the French Revolution and completed with World War I and II, by a “new” egalitarian or “horizontal” outlook incompatible with monarchy and kings. He identifies democracy (majority rule), socialism (international and national), and popular dictatorship as expressions of this new horizontal worldview. Furthermore, he provides ample historical illustration of how the transformation from monarchy to democracy changed the conduct of war from limited warfare to total war. Gerard Radnitzky, in his wide-ranging essay, bolsters Kuehnelt-Leddihn’s case against democracy. Following Anthony de Jasay, Radnitzky begins with a detailed analysis of the economics and politics of majoritarian democracy and refutes as illusory and impossible the claims of constitutional economists such as James Buchanan. A discussion of the thesis “democracies are more peaceful” occupies the center of his chapter. Based on analytical considerations and detailed historical evidence, Radnitzky rejects the thesis.Further, he identifies the thesis “that democracies do not make war with each other” as “a cornerstone of the New World Order crowd” and U.S. imperialism and hegemony. He concludes with a few game-theoretical considerations regarding the possibility of private defense coalitions and some remarks on the likelihood of the decline and demise of the State. Bertrand Lemennicier provides an economic-conceptual and formalistic, game-theoretical explanation of the effects and prospects of government policies and treaties concerning the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. In accordance with standard economic cartel theory, Lemennicier argues that any such agreements are bound to fail due to external and internal pressure. The cartel members cannot lastingly prevent nonmember countries from developing nuclear weapons independently. And within the cartel, each member has a constant incentive to cheat (and sell). 


此外，Lemennicier认为，即使卡特尔协议可以维持和执行，这仍然是一个“坏”的想法。当一个国家在核拥有和执行方面占主导地位时，世界变得不那么安全。 Lemennicier写道：“美国保持对核武器的遏制的垄断地位，扮演世界执法者的角色，排除寻求核武器国家的国际交流。“这样的立场是昂贵的，美国没有合法的权利要求这样的角色。”第三节的贡献回顾了国防和战争的私人替代品的历史记录。Joseph Stromberg认为贵族官员所指挥的专业“常备军”就是这种例子。他在意大利文艺复兴时期看过雇佣军的经历。他讨论了民兵在古希腊和罗马的共和理论和实践中对美国和瑞士的作用。游击战特别受到关注。其本质上的防御性被解释了，它在美国革命，南独立战争以及第二次盎格鲁 - 布尔战争中的作用被讨论了。基于这方面的证据，Stromberg建议，作为解决问题的防御保护志愿民兵的某种组合（启发如果由一个统一的思想或信念可能）和现代雇佣兵（在专业保险公司的形式），都沉浸在和游击战争的理论实践。Larry Sechrest打开他的贡献的一个简短的讨论，自然的“好”的国防和认为，防御是一个明显的“私人”好（虽然“国防”是“虚”的好）。然后他将这些理论考虑应用到海战中。特别是，他提供了一个详细的调查，“盗版”是一种形式的海战由私营的船只从第十二进行了第十九个世纪。Sechrest说明私掠船操作，法律海关附近长大，如何非常有效和有利可图的他们。最后，至于为什么私掠实践下降后，十九世纪，Sechrest 认为这没有技术的原因。与此相反，私掠船死了是因为它“太”有效并威胁正规海军的工作状态。Jeffrey Rogers Hummel从一个国家的形成和在无状态的社会状态的历史性的胜利的原因，探讨人类学的前提条件。他探讨了人口规模、地理、政治权力、财富和技术对某些国家和世界地区的成功以及其他国家失败的原因。特别是，赫梅尔考察并强调观念和思想信念的重要性，激励士气，在战争防御。最后，他对这一思想要求解放自己的本国“宏观悲观主义” (macroparasitism) 的意识形态要求，以及捍卫自由领土对另一外国的潜在侵略的前景。Hummel (赫梅尔) 表示相当乐观的关于这样一个防御的效果因为自由社会将是富有的、技术更先进的比中央集权社会却警告说，一个自由社会的维护（而不是回归国家主义）需要永恒的思想警惕的公共部分。最后一节，第四节，致力于私有安全生产理论及其各种实际应用。
瓦尔特•布洛克（Walter Block）在他的贡献中指出，要求税收征收政府可以合法地保护其公民不受侵略，这是与自己相抵触的，因为这样一个实体开始整个过程做保护那些在其控制下的完全相反。为了支持这一说法，布莱克回顾，分析和驳斥了整个国家主义的论点：“囚徒困境”，“搭便车”，“外部性”和“公共物品”赞成“国防”的论点“Block解释说，防御是私有财产的保护，”私人“是私有财产。最后，他讨论了这个论点，特别是在“公共选择”和“宪政经济学”界流行的论文，即国家是俱乐部（和俱乐部形式的国家）的形式，他同意约瑟夫•熊彼特（Joseph Schumpeter）的论断“这个论点只证明了多远去掉这部分社会科学是从科学的思维习惯。在我自己的贡献这一卷，我打开一个重建霍布斯神话的“集体安全”及其实证和逻辑反驳。接着他详细分析了风险、财产和保险。他评论“国家边界”的任意性，因此是“国家”防御（与私有财产的“自然”边界和防御边界形成鲜明对比）。他对保险保护与国家保护进行了比较分析，并将国家战争的逻辑与自由资助的保护机构的逻辑进行了对比。最后，Hoppe 指出保险机构，与国家不同，不会解除他们的保护，和他讨论的问题，如何在保护与专业保险机构结合自由武装的社会可能会去抵御侵略的国家。Guido Hülsmann，在本书的最后的贡献，研究分裂国家为建立私有财产秩序，保证有效的保护手段。他与其他形式的政治改革相比，讨论了脱离国家的性质及其比较优势。检查必须满足国家能够成功的条件后，Hülsmann转向分离主义运动的一个关键问题：防御政府从它们退出。他认为，“台独”分裂组织防御本身必须是运行在私有财产原则的基础上，以确保自由主义分裂国家的政治目标和军事效能，达到尽可能高的。虽然本卷中所提出的论点的含义是激进的和彻底的，但原则在根本上是非常简单的。在经济学中，贡献者寻求市场理论的一贯应用，而不是将其全部排除在生活的整个领域之外，也适用于与安全和防卫有关的货物和服务的交付。在政治上，捐款者只寻求杰佛逊在《独立宣言》中提出的原则的适用，即人民有权利和义务驱逐那些不影响其安全的政府，并寻找替代办法，为未来的安全提供保障。在这两方面，这些观点代表了传统自由主义理论的一个相对未被发掘的应用。然而，鉴于国家安全国家在我们自己时代的持续崛起，自由的未来可能取决于我们是否愿意尽最大努力推动这些原则。汉斯-赫尔曼•霍普
在政治上，贡献者只是寻求杰斐逊在《独立宣言》中提出的原则的应用，人们有权利和义务甩掉那些没有影响到安全的政府，并寻找替代方案，为未来的安全提供保障。在这两个方面，这些观念代表了传统自由主义理论的一个相对未被探索的应用。然而，鉴于国家安全国家在我们自己时代的持续崛起，自由的未来可能取决于我们是否愿意尽最大努力推动这些原则。

Hans-Hermann Hoppe
