Ni igbasile ti isubu ijoba Romu, Western Europe bere si subu sinu awon eto ti o je ti ologun ti awon ijoba ti o je alakoso kekere. Ni idaduro nipase igbimo ti ilu okeere yii, eyiti o niyanju lati dinku agbara ti ara eni kookan ati irora awon eniyan,[^27] ti o je itoju nipa ofin  ati awon eto abayebi, eyiti o je idiyele ti o lagbara si laarin awon alailegbe ti Catholic Ijoba, imoran ti eniyan ko ni idaniloju pe ohun-ini nikan ni ibamu pelu iseda ti eniyan gegebi imuduro onipin ni ipa. [^28] Awon ile-ise kekere ni idagbasoke ni ibi ti a ti fi agbara kuro ni agbara ijoba si aami kan ti a ko mo tele: ilu ilu ariwa Italy, paapaa Venice , awon ti Ajumose Hanseatic, bi Lubeck ati Hamburg, ati awon ti Flanders ati awon orile-ede kerekere, ni pato Antwerp ati Amsterdam. Nibe, awon ero ariyanjiyan ti igbekun, ti isinmo, ati ti awujo ti isakoso ti awon kilasi ti ko ni iyato ni a fi ropo nipase ero ti gbangba pe dipo se atileyin ominira, isogba, awon eto ohun ini, ati awon ibasepo adehun. Iroyin yii wa ni irorun ti o ni igbiyanju pelu awon eniyan titun ti o tesiwaju, ti o ni atileyin nipase awon ero ti o jora ati ti o ni ifojusi ti oran ti ominira je pe o lagbara lati sise.[^29]

Sibesibe, awon ero ti ogbon-ara eniyan, ominira, ati ohun-ini ti ara eni ko sibesibe ni ibigbogbo. Fidimule nikan ni agbegbe die ti a ti tuka, agbara die sii tabi sehin ti o lagbara ti o mo pe awon isele be gegebi ibanuje si idurosinsin ara won le tun tun mu agbara po. Nipa gbigbimo awon agbegbe won ni ona pipe ti awon igbakeji interfeudal ati ogun ni awon ipele ti o tobi pupo ati nitorina o se ifojusi ati siso awon ipa won, won ti le ni aseyori lati fogun idije ti idaniloju ti ominira ti n salaye ni awon aaye die die ati awon atunse ti won lo. Sakoso lori iru awon agbegbe pelu agbara ti o po sii. Awon ojo ori ti absolutism ti seto sinu, ati pelu re ni ojo ti a super-agbara feudal, ti ijoba oba, eyi ti o ti ni ifijise ti iseto ni eto ti aifowoyi isise lori awon ile ti o fun igba akoko to iwon ti awon orile-ede ti igbalode ojogbon faramo. Pẹlu absolutism mu idaduro, awon agbegbe awon ifigagbaga ti ilu ofe ti tun se pataki si idinku aje ati iseduro, eyi ti ninu awon igba miiran ti fi opin si fun awon ogorun odun.[^30]

Sibe igbala yi ko segun awon ero ti ominira ati ohun-ini eni-ini. Ni idakeji, awon imoran wonyi rii iyipada ti o lagbara pupo ati imoran ti ita gbangba si ilosiwaju. Ti o ni idiwo nipase asa atowodowo ategun ti o ga julo, asa atowodowo miiran ti o ni iyipada ti o ni imoran: Awon asa ti ohun ti o di mimo julo ni igbalarawo ati awon ohun-ini ati paapaa ti o ni idiyele ti ominira ati ohun-ini eni kookan ti o si ni idasile si imo-imo imoran. [^31] Ni afikun, ti awon iriri laipe ti aseyori ti o ni iriri ti o wa labe awon ipo ti ominira ati adehun iseduro se iranlowo nipase re, idagbasoke isaro oro aje gba igbega nla. Awon eko  orisa ti atijo ti awon Mercantilism, awon ti o wa ni ilu, ati * Polizeiwissenschaft * ti di imo-imo-oro nipa imo-oro ti awon oloje oselu titun ti o se alaye ni isookan, pelu imudarasi pipe ati ailopin, ipa ti o se pataki ti ohun-ini eni-ini ati adehun fun ilana iseduro ati oloro Ibi ipilese ati eniti o se akiyesi eto imulo laissez-faire.[^32]

Lati odun 1700 lo, awon ero wonyi ni idojuko si iru ipo bee pe awon ipo iyipada ti o waye laarin awon alakoso absolutist ni Western Europe. England ti lo nipase opolopo awon igbiyanju ni odun kesandilogun ti o segun agbara ti ipo alakoso. Awon ogorun odun mejidinlogun dopin pelu awon isele cataclysmic ti awon ayipada American ati French. Nigbana ni titi di opin odun karundinlogun odun kan ti awon igbara-afefe ni igbagbogbo yo kuro ni ihamo ijoba si gbogbo igba die ni gbogbo Western Europe.

Idii ti o ti segun ero gbangba ati pe o ti se idinku yi ti agbara ijoba je seese pe ominira ati ohun ini ara eni je o kan, ti o ni ara eni, adayeba, alaileba ati mimo, ati pe enikeni ti o ba wa ni iru eto bee, oluba ijoba kan ko dinku (tabi die sii ju be lo) ju igbekele ikoko lo, o ye ki o se akiyesi ati ki o se mu bi abuku ti o ye.

Pelu igbese aseyori kookan si ona igbala, isoro naa dagba si okun sii. Pelupelu, ti a npe ni Iyika Ise-Ise ti awon iyipada ti o wa ni idojuko ti mu sii, ti o si mu ki a gbo ti awon idagbasoke osuwon aje, ti o ni atileyin fun igba akokoko ni o npo si lopolopo eniyan ati ni pelupelu sugbon nigbagbogbo n gbe igbega igbesi aye gbogbo kale, seda o ni idaniloju ti ko ni igbekele. [^ 33] Lati dajudaju, ni Iha Iwo-Oorun ti o wa ni opolopop awon ti o wa ni idajo ati idajo ti o wa ni idajo ti o wa ni oke Europe paapaa lakoko idaji akoko ti odun ogorun odun nigbati ogojo ti ominira ati ohun ini ikoko ipele ti o ga julo, sugbon ilosiwaju si ipalara ti o ga julo ti awon agbara ipa ti ijoba ati si ominira ati oore-oro aje ti o dabi enipe a ko le seese. [^34] Pelupelu, nibe ni America ti o ni ominira, laisi ominira kan ati pelu o fee eyikeyi ijoba ni gbogbo, ti o ni iru ipa iru si ti ilu ilu ofe ti awon agbalagba arin: ti sise bi orisun ideological awokose apanilerin ati aaye arin ifamora kan sugbon lori titobi nla.[^35]

Loni, o ku die ninu asa ti eya-ini ati idaniloju-iha-ijoba re. Biotilejepe won n se bayi ni ipo ti o tobi julo, awon imudani ijoba ti awon olohun-ini ti ara eni ni o ni eru pupo bi eto. Ko si igbimo ti gbogbo eniyan ti o n sakiyesi ijoba bi ile-ise agbese kan ti o da lori idiwo ati awon ohun-ini ti ko to, lati daaju ati se yeye ni gbogbo ibi ati ni gbogbo igba lori awon orisun agbekale. Ko si tun je pe o dabi pe o je alailegan ti ibaje lati se ihamo tabi, paapaa buru si, lati kopa ipa ninu imuduro awon ise isowo, ko si je igbimo ti gbogbo eniyan pe enikan yoo ni awon iseduro aladani eyikeyi pelu awon eniyan ti o ni irufe bee awon ise.

Ni idakeji, dipo ti wa ni rerin kuro ni ipele naa tabi pade pelu irunu tabi aisedede, awon eniyan ni a bowo fun awon okunrin ti o to ati otito. Oloselu ti o se atileyin fun itesiwaju ti eto ti nlo lowo ti owo-ori ati ilana ofin ti kii se adehun pelu tabi ti o tun nbeere wiwa re ni a se itoju nibikibi pelu owo, kuku ju egan. Ologbon ti o se idasiwo owo-ori ati ilana je iyasoto gegebi oluro ti o jinle ati ojulowo ni oju oju eniyan, dipo ti a fi ara re han bi etan ogbon. Oluranlowo IRS je pe okunrin kan n se ise bi eto bi tire ati ti mi, ati pe ko se apejuwe ti ko si okan ti o fe lati ni bi ibatan, ore, tabi aladugbo.

Bawo ni ijoba se le se iru irufe bee ki o si mu iyipada ti o wa ni gbangba ti o yo opin isaaju lori titobi re ati pe o gba laaye (ati si laaye) lati dagba ni otito ati awon oro ibatan?[^36]

There can be no doubt that the key element in this turn-around of public opinion that started to take hold in Western Europe around the mid-nineteenth century, around the turn of this century in the U.S., and then at a steadily accelerating pace everywhere after World War I[^37] has been the emergence of attractive new—implicitly or explicitly—statist ideologies.

In fact, states have always been aware of the decisive importance of state-supportive ideologies for stabilizing and increasing their exploitative grip on a population, and in this knowledge they have always made attempts to exert their control, above all, over the institutions of education. Even at their weakest, it should appear natural to see them give particular attention to “correct” ideological instruction and to concentrate whatever is left of their power on the destruction of all independent institutions of learning and their take-over into the states’ monopolistic hands. Accordingly, in order to regain the upper hand in the permanent struggle of ideas, since the mid-nineteenth century a steady process of nationalizing or socializing schools and universities (with one of the most recent examples being the unsuccessful attempt by the Mitterand government to crush France’s Catholic schools) and lengthening the period of compulsory schooling has taken place.[^38]

Yet pointing out this and the related facts of an increasingly close alliance between state and intellectuals[^39] and the latter’s rewriting history in line with statist ideologies merely puts the problem into focus. Indeed, when one hears about the state’s take-over of the system of education, must one not immediately ask how it could succeed in doing so if public opinion were really committed to a private property ethic?! Such a take-over presupposes a change in public opinion. How, then, was this accomplished, especially in view of the fact that such a change implies the acceptance of manifestly wrong ideas and thus can hardly be explained as an endogenously motivated process of intellectual advancement?

It would seem that such a change toward falsehood requires the systematic introduction of exogenous forces: A true ideology is capable of supporting itself merely by virtue of being true. A false one needs reinforcement by outside influences with a clear-cut, tangible impact on people in order to be capable of generating and supporting a climate of intellectual corruption.

It is to these tangible, ideology-supporting and reinforcing factors that one must turn to understand the decline of the private property ethic and the corresponding rise of statism during the last 100 to 150 years.[^40]

I will discuss four such factors and explain their corruptive function for public opinion. All are changes in the organizational structure of the state. The first one is the state’s structural adjustment from a military or police state toward a redistributive one. (The prototype of such an organizational change is the often copied Prussia under Bismarck.) Instead of a governmental structure that is characterized by a small ruling class that uses its exploitatively appropriated resources almost exclusively for pure governmental consumption or for the maintenance of its military and police forces, states now increasingly engage in a policy of actively buying support among the people outside of the governmental apparatus itself. Through a system of transfer payments, grants of privilege to special clients, and governmental production and provision of certain “civilian” goods and services (as for instance education), the population is made increasingly dependent on the continuation of state rule. People outside the governmental apparatus increasingly have a tangible financial stake in its existence and would be harmed, at least in the short run and in parts of their existence, if the government were to lose power. Quite naturally, this dependency tends to reduce resistance and increase support. Exploitation may still seem reprehensible, but it is less so if one also happens to be someone who at least on some fronts is a legal benefactor of such actions.

[^27]: The importance of international anarchy for the erosion of feudalism and the rise of capitalism has been justly emphasized by Jean Baechler, *The Origins of Capitalism* (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1976), esp. chap. 7\. He writes: “The constant expansion of the market, both in extensiveness and in intensity, was the result of an absence of a political order extending over the whole of Western Europe” (p. 73). “The expansion of capitalism owes its origin and *raison d’etre* to political anarchy…. Collectivism and state management have only succeeded in school textbooks” (p. 77).

> All power tends toward the absolute. If it is not absolute, this is because some kind of limitations have come into play … those in the positions of power at the center ceaselessly tried to erode these limitations. They never succeeded, and for the reason that also seems to me to be tied to the international system: a limitation of power to act externally and the constant threat of foreign assault (the two characteristics of a multi-polar system) imply that power is also limited internally and must rely on autonomous centers of decision-making and so may use them only sparingly. (p. 78)

[^28]: The central characteristic of the modern natural law tradition (as represented by St. Thomas Aquinas, Luis de Molina, Francisco Suarez, and the late sixteenth century Spanish Scholastics, and the Protestant Hugo Grotius) was its thorough rationalism: its idea of universally valid, absolute, and immutable principles of human conduct that are—ultimately independent of any theological beliefs—to be discovered by and founded in and reason alone. “Man,” writes Frederick C. Copleston, [*Aquinas* (London: Penguin Books, 1955), pp. 213–14] cannot read, as it were, the mind of God … (but) he can discern the fundamental tendencies and needs of his nature, and by reflecting on them he can come to a knowledge of the natural moral law…. Every man possesses … the light of reason whereby he can reflect … and promulgate to himself the natural law, which is the totality of the universal precepts of dictates of right reason concerning the good which is to be pursued and the evil which is to be shunned.

> On the origin and development of the natural rights doctrine and its idea of justice and property (including all the statist failings and slips of its aforementioned heroes) see Richard Tuck, *Natural Rights Theories* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979); on the revolutionary character of the idea of natural law see Lord (John) Acton, *Essays on Freedom and Power* (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press. 1948); as an eminent contemporary natural rights philosopher see Henry Veatch, *Human Rights* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985).

[^29]: On the rise of the cities see C.M. Cipolla, *Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy 1000–1700* (New York: Norton, 1980), chap. 4\. Europe around 1000, writes Cipolla,

> was poor and primitive … made up of numberless rural microcosms—the manors…. Society was dominated by a spirit of resignation, suspicion, and fear toward the outside world…. The arts, education, trade, production, and the division of labor were reduced to a minimal level. The use of money almost completely disappeared. The population was small, production meager, and poverty extreme…. The prevailing ideas reflected a brutal and superstitious society—fighting and praying were the only respectable activities…. Those who labored were regarded as despicable serfs…. In this depressed and depressing world, the rise of cities between the tenth and thirteenth centuries represented a new element which changed the course of history. (p. 144)
> 
> At the root of urban growth was a massive migratory movement. (p. 145)
> 
> The town was to the people of Europe from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries what America was to Europeans in the nineteenth century. The town was the “frontier,” a new and dynamic world where people felt they could break their ties with an unpleasant past, where people hoped they could find opportunities for economic and social success, where sclerotic traditional institutions and discriminations no longer counted, and where there would be ample reward for initiative, daring, and industriousness (p. 146). In the feudal world, a vertical arrangement typically prevailed, where relations between men were dictated by the concepts of fief and service; investiture and homage; lord, vassal, and serf. In the cities, a horizontal arrangement emerged, characterized by cooperation among equals. (p. 148)

See also Henri Pirenne, *Medieval Cities* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1952), chap. 5; Michael Tigar and Madeleine Levy, *Law and the Rise of Capitalism* (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1977).

[^30]: See on this Carolyn Webber and Aaron Wildavsky, *A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World* (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986), pp. 235–41; Pirenne, *Medieval Cities*, pp. 179–80, pp. 227f.

[^31]: As the outstanding champion of this tradition see John Locke, *Two Treatises of Government*, ed. Peter Laslett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960).

> [E]very man has a property in his own person. This nobody has any right to but himself. The labour of his body and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the state that nature hath provided, and left in it, he hath mixed his labour with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property. It being by him removed from the common state nature placed it in, it hath by his labour something annexed to it that excludes the common right of other men. For this labour being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but he can have a right to what that is once joined to. (p. 305)

See also Ernest K. Bramsted and K.J. Melhuish, eds., *Western Liberalism* (London: Longman, 1978).

[^32]: See on these developments of economic theory Marjorie Grice-Hutchinson, *The School of Salamanca: Readings in Spanish Monetary History* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952); Raymond de Roover, *Business, Banking, and Economic Thought* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974); Murray N. Rothbard, “New Light on the Prehistory of the Austrian School” in Edwin Dolan, ed., *The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); on the outstanding contributions in particular of Richard Cantillon and A.R.J. Turgot see *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 7, no. 2 (1985) (which is devoted to Cantillon’s work) and Murray N. Rothbard, *The Brilliance of Turgot* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, Occasional Paper Series, 1986); see also Joseph A. Schumpeter, *A History of Economic Analysis* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1954).

[^33]: On the Industrial Revolution and its misinterpretation by the orthodox (school-book) historiography see F.A. Hayek, ed., *Capitalism and the Historians* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963).

[^34]: In fact, though the decline of liberalism began around the mid-nineteenth century, the optimism that it had created survived until the early twentieth century. Thus, John Maynard Keynes could write [*The Economic Consequences of the Peace* (London: Macmillan, 1919)]:

> What an extraordinary episode in the economic progress of man that age was which came to an end in August 1914! The greater part of the population, it is true, worked hard and lived at a low standard of comfort, yet were, to all appearances, reasonably contented with this lot. But escape was possible, for any man of capacity or character at all exceeding the average, into the middle and upper classes, for whom life offered, at a low cost and with the least trouble, convenience, comforts, and amenities beyond the compass of the richest and most powerful monarchs of other ages…. But, most important of all, he [man] regarded this state of affairs as normal, certain, and permanent, except in the direction of further improvement, and any deviation from it as aberrant, scandalous, and avoidable. The projects and politics of militarism and imperialism, of racial and cultural rivalries, of monopolies, restrictions, and exclusion, which were to play the serpent to this paradise, were little more than the amusements of his daily newspaper, and appeared to exercise almost no influence at all on the ordinary course of social and economic life, the internationalization of which was nearly complete in practice. (pp. 6–7)

For a similar account see also J.P. Taylor, *English History 1914–15* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965), p. 1.

[^35]: Characterizing nineteenth-century America Robert Higgs (*Crisis and Leviathan* [New York: Oxford University Press, 1987]) writes:

> There was a time, long ago, when the average American could go about his daily business hardly aware of the government—especially the federal government. As a farmer, merchant, or manufacturer, he could decide what, how, when, and where to produce and sell his goods, constrained by little more than market forces. Just think: no farm subsidies, price supports, or acreage controls; no Federal Trade Commission; no antitrust laws; no Interstate Commerce Commission. As an employer, employee, consumer, investor, lender, borrower, student, or teacher, he could proceed largely according to his own lights. Just think: no National Labor Relations Board; no federal consumer “protection” laws; no Securities and Exchange Commission; no Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; no Department of Health and Human Services. Lacking a central bank to issue national paper currency, people commonly used gold coins to make purchases. There were no general sales taxes, no Social Security taxes, no income taxes. Though governmental officials were as corrupt then as now—maybe more so—they had vastly less to be corrupt with. Private citizens spent about fifteen times more than all governments combined. (p. IX)

[^36]: On the following see in particular A.V. Dicey, *Lectures on the Relation Between Law and Public Opinion in England* (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books, 1981); Elie Halevy, *A History of the English People in the 19th Century*, 2 vols. (London: Benn, 1961); W.H. Greenleaf, *The British Political Tradition*, 3 vols. (London: Methuen, 1983–87); Arthur E. Ekirch, *The Decline of American Liberalism* (New York: Atheneum, 1976); Higgs, *Crisis and Leviathan*.

[^37]: On the worldwide excesses of statism since World War I see Paul Johnson, *Modern Times: The World from the Twenties to the Eighties* (New York: Harper and Row, 1983).

[^38]: On the relation between state and education see Murray N. Rothbard, *Education, Free and Compulsory: The Individual’s Education* (Wichita, Kans.: Center for Independent Education, 1972).

[^39]: On the relation between state and intellectuals see Julien Benda, *The Treason of the Intellectuals* (New York: Norton, 1969).

[^40]: On the following see in particular Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat*, chaps. 1, 5; idem, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chap. 8.
