
Bakannaa, idi ti o se pataki fun isiro ti je eko ti a priori ati sibesibe, gege bi awon oniye-oro ti ni oye nigba gbogbo, bayi o di mimo. Awon oludaniloju ti o ni igbimo-oselopo ti ara ti ni igbalode muwole ti onisiro bi ifasile awon ami ti a ti ko lainidii gege bi awon ilana iyipada ti a ko ni igbekele, Fun eleyi, eyi ti o je ki o je ki isiro ohun kan sugbon ki o sere, sugbon o je ologbon, ilosiwaju aseyori ti isiro ni eko physic je emu ogbon. Nitooto, awon Alamo ara ni yoo ni lati salaye alaye yii gege bi jijepe isele iyanu kan. Ti o je ko si iyanu, sibesibe, o han gbangba ni igba ti o je ilana eko tabi –lati lo nibi awon oro ti o je akoye oro oniye-oro  julo akosile -mathimatician  Paul Lorenzen ati ile-iwe –ise ti o je ise tabi ti o ni isiro ti apere. Atilese ati awon ohun kiko re gege bi eko imo-ogbon ti a priori -synthetic ti wa ni orisun ni oye wa nipa atunwi –atunse ise. Ni afikun, o duro lori oye wa itumo ti "se eyi –ki o tun se eyi leekansi, ti o bere lati abajade ti o wa bayi". Pelupelu, awon isiro ti o wa ni ipile pelu awon ohun gidi: pelu ti a se tabi ti se afihan awon ohun ti nkan kan. O se afihan awon ibara enisoro ti o wa laarin iru awon isiro nitori otito pe won ti ko won gege bi ofin atunse. Gege bi Paulu Lorenzen ti se afihan ni apejuwe, kii se gbogbo awon ohun ti o wa bi mathematiciani bayi-ati awon eya naa lehinna o ye ki o mo daju fun ohun ti won je: awon ere ifihan alaise ti ko wulo. Sugbon gbogbo awon ona ero mathematician ti a nlo ni ise-ise physic (bii awon irinse ti isiro kiasika), le ni agbara ti o ni agbara. Won kii se awon ijerisi ti o ni idaniloju sugbon dipo awon imoran otito nipa otito. Won lo si ohun gbogbo bi o ti ni awon eya kan tabi die e sii, ati pe bi a ti se awon ifilele wonyi tabi ti a mo bi awon iwon nipase ilana kan ti "se tun se, se tabi se imoran miiran nipa tun se ise isaaju." [^20 ] Leekansi, okan le so pe 2 ati 2 je igba miiran 4 sugbon awon igba 2 tabi 5, ati ni otito gangan, fun awon kiniun pelu awon omo-agutan tabi fun awon ehoro, eyi le je otito, [^21] sugbon ni otito ti igbese, ni idamo tabi se awon eya naa ni awon atunse, otito ti 2 ati 2 ko je ohunkohun sugbon 4 ko le see se.

[^20]: Lori itumo ti o se alaye ti o wa ni akosile wo White, * Idi ati Imoye *, pp. 427-31; lori ipile ti o se agbekale ti isiro, ni pato, woo Lorenzen, * Einfuhrung ni ise Logik ati Mathematik *; idem, * MethodischesDenken *, chaps. 6, 7; idem, * Emu ise deede ati Ethics *, chap. 4; lori ipile agbekale ti isiro onipori woo Paul Lorenzen, * Iyato ati Integral-EinekonstruktiveEinführung ni iku klassische Analysis * (Frankfurt / M .: AkademischeVerlagsgesellschaft, 1965); fun imoran ti o ni imoran ti mathematiki formalism wo Kambartel, * Erfahrung und Struktur *, chap. 6, esp. pp. 236-42; lori ai se pataki ti Godel-theorem ti a gbajumo fun isiro ti o daadaa woo Paul Lorenzen, * Metamathematik * (Mannheim: BibliographischesInstitut, 1962); tun Charles Thiel, "Das Begründungsproblem der Mathematic und die Philosophie," ni Kambartel ati Mittelstrass, eds., * Zumnormativen Fundament der Wissenschaft *, esp. pp 99-101 \. Ifarahan Kurt Gödel, eyi ti bi eri ti o se atileyin ni iseduro kuku ju idinadii ti o se alaye ti o seese fun imoye a priori, nikan se afihan pe a ko le saseyori iseto eto Hilist akoko nipase nitori pe lati se afihan ifarahan ti awon eko axiomatic kan okan gbodo ni isiro pelu awon ona agbara die sii ju awon ti a se agbekale ni yii-ara re. O yanilenu, odun pupo saaju eri Godel ti 1931, awon isoro ti eto formalist ti yori atijo Hilbert lati se akiyesi pe o nilo lati tun pada ni itumo iyipada ti mathematiki * si la * Kant, eyi ti yoo fun awon axiom ipile ati idalare ti o je igbekele igbokanle eyikeyi awon eri imudarasi ti isase. Woo Kambartel, * Erfahrung ati Struktur *, pp. 185-87.

[^21]: Awon apeere ti iru yi ni lilo nipase Popper ki o le "saro" imo-ogbon ti awon ofin ti isiro je ofin ti otito. Woo Karl Popper, * Awon ifokansi ati awon imoran * (London: Routledge ati Kegan Paul, 1969), p. 211.

Pelupelu, awon oniroyin atijo ti so pe awon eya ara ilu Euclidean je a priori sibe sibesibe o pe imoye ti o ni imoran nipa aaye ti o ni atileyin, pelu, fun imoran wa si awon idiwo ti eko lori eko. Niwon igbasile ti awon eya-ara ti kii-Euclidean ati ni pato niwon igbasile iyasoto ti Einstein ti gravitation, ipo ti o ni agbara nipa iwon-ara je tunmo-ara ati imudarasi. O je ti apere onirururu bi boya o je ara ti awon oro ti o ni iyato, oro-eko ti o ni ipilese, tabi bi jijeeri ti ko ni itumo. Eya-ara yii je boya isise tabi ailopin ayeraye si idanwo ti o dabi pe o je eyiti ko ni ibamu pelu otito pe agbasoro Euclidean je ipile ti imo-ero ati imole, ati pe ko si enikan ninu awon aaye naa ti o ronu nipa irufe bee gegebi o je otito nikan. [^22] Imo gege bi a ti ni idiwo ti iseduro se alaye idi ti idiwo alakikan oju-iwe kede ti ko to ati idi ti idibaje ti iseduro agbasoro Euclidean kii se nkan ijamba. Alaye imole tun wa ninu itumo ti igbese. Ise je ise ti ara ti ara ni aaye. Laisi igbasile nibe ko le ni imo ti awon ibasepo ile-aye ko si si wiwon. Iwon wi pe nkan kan si apeere kan. Laisi awon ajohunse, ko si wiwon, ati pe ko si iwon ti o le se atunse awon bosewa. Lai se kedere, o ye ki a pese apere ti o ni ibamu pelu awon ilana ti o se pataki fun iselopo awon isoro ti ara ni aaye ati idasile awon ohun elo wiwon nipase ara ti ara ati ni ibamu pelu awon ilana ti awon ile aye ti o wa ninu re. Adaro-eri Euclidean, gege bi Paul Lorenzen ti se alaye tele, ko si siwaju sii ati pe ko kere ju atunse awon ilana ti o dara julo ti o je ki iselopo iru awon ipile irufe be gege bi awon ojuami, awon ila, awon oko ofurufu ati awon ijinna ti o wa ni die sii tabi kere si pipe sugbon ona ti o rorun nigba gbogbo ti a dapo tabi ti a mo ni paapaa julo awon ohun elo ti o wa ni ibere ti awon wiwon aaye gege bi odiwon osuwon. Bi o se le je, awon iwuwon ati awon ilosiwaju normative ko le je atunṣse nipase abajade ti iwon ilawon eyikeyi. On the contrary, their cognitive validity is substantiated by the fact that it is they that make physical measurements in space possible. Any actual measurement must already presuppose the validity of the norms leading to the construction of one’s measurement standards. It is in this sense that geometry is an a priori science and must simultaneously be regarded as an empirically meaningful discipline because it is not only the very precondition for any empirical spatial description, but it is also the precondition for any active orientation in space.[^23]

[^22]: See on this also Mises, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science*, pp. 12–14.

[^23]: On the a prioristic character of Euclidean geometry see Lorenzen, *Methodisches Denken*, chaps. 8 and 9; idem, *Normative Logic and Ethics*, chap. 5; Hugo Dingler, *Die Grundlagen der Geometrie* (Stuttgart: Enke, 1933); on Euclidean geometry as a necessary presupposition of objective, intersubjectively communicable measurements and in particular of any empirical verification of non-Euclidean geometries (after all, the lenses of the telescopes which one uses to confirm Einstein’s theory regarding the non-Euclidean structure of physical space must themselves be constructed according to Euclidean principles) see Kambartel, *Erfahrung und Struktur*, pp. 132–33; Peter Janich, *Die Protophysik der Zeit* (Mannhein: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969), pp. 45–50; idem, “Eindeutigkeit, Konsistenz und methodische Ordnung,” in Kambartel and Mittelstrass, eds., *Zum normativen Fundament der Wissenschaft*.

::::Following the lead of Hugo Dingler, Paul Lorenzen and other members of the so-called Erlangen School have worked out a system of protophysics, which contains all a prioristic presuppositions of empirical physics, including, apart from geometry, also chronometry and hylometry (i.e., classical mechanics without gravitation, or rational mechanics).

::::> Geometry, chronometry and hylometry are a priori theories which make empirical measurements of space, time and material “possible.” They have to be established before physics in the modern sense of an empirical science, with hypothetical fields of forces, can begin. Therefore, I should like to call these disciplines by a common name: protophysics. (Lorenzen, *Normative Logic and Ethics*, p. 60)

In view of the recognition of the praxeological character of knowledge, these insights regarding the nature of logic, arithmetic and geometry become integrated and embedded into a system of epistemological dualism.[^24] The ultimate justification for this dualist position (the claim that there are two realms of intellectual inquiry that can be understood a priori as requiring categorically distinct methods of treatment and analysis), also lies in the praxeological nature of knowledge. It explains why we must differentiate between a realm of objects which is categorized causally and a realm that is categorized teleologically instead.

[^24]: On the fundamental nature of epistemological dualism see also Mises, *Theory and History*, pp. 1–2.

I have already briefly indicated during my discussion of praxeology that causality is a category of action. The idea of causality—that there are constant, time-invariantly operating causes which allow one to project past observations regarding the relation of events into the future—is something (as empiricism since Hume has noticed) which has no observational basis whatsoever. One cannot observe the connecting link between observations. Even if one could, such an observation would not prove it to be a time-invariant connection. Instead, the principle of causality must be understood as implied in our understanding of action as an interference with the observational world, made with the intent of diverting the natural course of events in order to produce a different, preferred state of affairs (of making things happen that otherwise would not happen), and thus presupposes the notion of events which are related to each other through time-invariantly operating causes. An actor might err with respect to his particular assumptions about which earlier interference produced which later result. But successful or not, any action, changed or unchanged in light of its previous success or failure, presupposes that there are constantly connected events as such, even if no particular cause for any particular event can ever be preknown to any actor. Without such an assumption it would be impossible to ever categorize two or more observational experiments as falsifying or confirming each other rather than interpreting them as logically incommensurable events. Only because the existence of time-invariantly operating causes *as such* is already assumed can one ever encounter particular instances of confirming or disconfirming observational evidence, or can there ever be an actor who can learn anything from past experience by classifying his actions as successful and confirming some previous knowledge or as unsuccessful and disconfirming it. It is simply by virtue of acting and distinguishing between successes and failures that the a priori validity of the principle of causality is established; even if one tried, one could not successfully refute its validity.[^25]

[^25]: On the a prioristic character of the category of causality see Mises, *Human Action*, chap. 5; Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung*; idem, “Is Research Based on Causal Scientific Principles Possible in the Social Sciences?” (infra chap. 7); on the causality principle as a necessary presupposition in particular also of the indeterminacy principle of quantum physics and the fundamental misconception involved in interpreting the Heisenberg-principle as invalidating the causality principle see Kambartel, *Erfahrung and Struktur*, pp. 138–40; also Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism,” footnote 36\. In fact, it is precisely the indisputable praxeological fact that separate measurement acts can only be performed sequentially which explains the very possibility of irreducibly probabilistic—rather than deterministic—predictions as they are characteristic of quantum physics; however, in order to perform any experiments in the field of quantum mechanics, and in particular to repeat two or more experiments and state this to be the case, the validity of the causality principle must evidently already be presupposed.

In so understanding causality as a necessary presupposition of action, it is also immediately implied that its range of applicability must then be delineated a priori from that of the category of teleology. Indeed, both categories are strictly exclusive and complementary. Action presupposes a causally structured observational reality, but the reality of action which we can understand as requiring such structure, is not itself causally structured. Instead, it is a reality that must be categorized teleologically, as purpose-directed, meaningful behavior. In fact, one can neither deny nor undo the view that there are two categorically different realms of phenomena, since such attempts would have to presuppose causally related events qua actions that take place within observational reality as well as the existence of intentionally rather than causally related phenomena in order to interpret such observational events as meaning to deny something. Neither a causal nor a teleological monism could be justified without running into an open contradiction: in physically stating either position and in claiming to say something meaningful in so doing, the case is in fact made for an indisputable complementarity of both a realm of causal *and* teleological phenomena.[^26]

[^26]: On the necessary complementarity of the categories of causality and teleology see Mises, *Human Action*, p. 25; idem, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science*, pp. 6–8; Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung*; idem, “Is Research Based on Causal Scientific Principles Possible in the Social Sciences?” (infra chap. 7); also Georg Henrik von Wright, *Norm and Action* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963); idem, *Explanation and Understanding* (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1971); K.O. Apel, *Die Erklären: Verstehen Kontroverse in transzendental-pragmatischer Sicht* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1979).

Everything which is not an action must necessarily be categorized causally. There is nothing to be known a priori about this range of phenomena except that it is structured causally and that it is structured according to the categories of propositional logic, arithmetic and geometry.[^27] Everything else there is to know about this range of phenomena must be derived from contingent observations and thus represents a posteriori knowledge. In particular, all knowledge about two or more specific observational events being causally related or not is a posteriori knowledge. Obviously, the range of phenomena described in this way coincides (more or less) with what is usually considered to be the field of the empirical natural sciences.

[^27]: More precisely still, it is structured according to the categories of logic, arithmetic, and protophysics (including geometry). See note 23 above.

In contrast, everything that is an action must be categorized teleologically. This realm of phenomena is constrained by the laws of logic and arithmetic, too. But it is not constrained by the laws of geometry as incorporated in our instruments of measuring spatially extending objects because actions do not exist apart from subjective interpretations of observable things. Therefore, they must be identified by reflective understanding rather than spatial measurements. Nor are actions causally connected events, but events that are connected meaningfully within a categorical framework of means and ends.

One can not know a priori what the *specific* values, choices and costs of some actor are or will be. This would fall entirely into the province of empirical, a posteriori knowledge. In fact, which particular action an actor is going to undertake would depend on his knowledge regarding the observational reality and/or the reality of other actors’ actions. It would be manifestly impossible to conceive of such states of knowledge as predictable on the basis of time-invariantly operating causes. A knowing actor cannot predict his future knowledge before he has actually acquired it, and he demonstrates, simply by virtue of distinguishing between successful and unsuccessful predictions, that he must conceive of himself as capable of learning from unknown experiences in as yet unknown ways. Thus, knowledge regarding the particular course of actions is only a posteriori. Since such knowledge would have to include the actor’s own knowledge—as a necessary ingredient of every action whose every change can have an influence on a particular action being chosen—teleological knowledge must also necessarily be reconstructive or historical knowledge. It would only provide *ex post* explanations which would have no systematic bearing on the prediction of future actions because future states of knowledge could never be predicted on the basis of constantly operating empirical causes. Obviously, such a delineation of a branch of a posteriori and reconstructive science of action fits the usual description of such disciplines as history and sociology.[^28]

[^28]: On the logic of history and sociology as reconstructive disciplines see, in addition to the works of Mises mentioned at the outset of this chapter, Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung*, chap. 2.

What *is* known to be true a priori regarding the field of action and what would then have to constrain any historical or sociological explanation is this: For one thing, any such explanation, which essentially would have to reconstruct an actor’s knowledge, would invariably have to be a reconstruction in terms of knowledge of ends and means, of choices and costs, of profits and losses and so on. Second, since these are evidently the categories of praxeology as conceived of by Mises, any such explanation must also be constrained by the laws of praxeology. Since these laws are a priori laws, they must also operate as logical constraints on any future course of action. They are valid independent of any specific state of knowledge that an actor might have acquired, simply by virtue of the fact that whatever this state might be, it must be described in terms of action categories. And as referring to actions as such, the laws of praxeology must then be coextensive with all the predictive knowledge there can be in the field of the science of action. In fact, ignoring for the moment that the status of geometry as an a priori science is ultimately grounded in our understanding of action and in so far praxeology must be regarded as the more fundamental cognitive discipline, the peculiar role of praxeology proper within the entire system of epistemology can be understood as somewhat analogous to that of geometry. Praxeology is for the field of action what Euclidean geometry is for the field of observations (non-actions). As the geometry incorporated in our measuring instruments constrains the spatial structure of observational reality, so praxeology constrains the range of things that can possibly be experienced in the field of actions.[^29]

[^29]: On the categorical distinctiveness of praxeological theory and history (sociology) and the logical constraints that praxeology imposes on historical and sociological research as well as on social and economic predictions, see Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 51–59, 117–18; Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism”; idem, *Praxeology and Economic Science*.
