Ni idanimo ti ipa ti ibaje yii lori ero eniyan, lehinna, awon ipinle ti npo si ilosiwaju si awon eto imulo. Pipin awon inawo ijoba fun awon inawo ilu ti o se afiwe si inawo ologun ati imudara ijoba ti o po sii. Awon inawo ikehin le tun dara si ni awon ofin pipe, ati pe won ti se be be nibikibi titi o fi di oni yi, sugbon won se pataki ni ibikibi ti o ni ibatan si awon inawo ti a seto si awon ona redistributionist.[^41]

Ti o da lori awon ipo pataki ti ero eniyan, awon iru imulo redistributionist naa ni igbagbogbo lo okan ninu awon foomu meji ati nigbagbogbo, gegebi ninu oran Prussia mejeji: Ni ona kan awon foomu * Sozialpolitik *, ti a npe ni atunse iranlowo, ni gbogbo igba ijerisi owo lati "awon ile-ise" laarin awon ti o n se nkan si "awon ti kii se," ati ni apa keji ti isowo awon isowo ati awon ilana, ni gbogbo igba ti o n ṣe atunse  lati awon "awon ti ko ni-sibesibe" "ti tele - ni" ti a ti fi idi silẹ. Pelu fifihan * Sozialpolitik * edun kan ni a se si awon oro ti ko ni aijopo ati apakan kan ti o le je ibaje sinu gbigba isakoso ipinle ni pasipaaro fun imuduro ipinle ti "idajo ododo." iseto ilana imuja isowo ati ilana okan npe ejo si awon ikunsise, paapa laarin awon ile-ise bourgeois, ati pe a le gba lati gba awon ipinnu ti ko ni iyasoto ti ipinle ni pasipaaro fun ifaramo re si itoju itoju ipo kan. Awujosepo awujo ati isedede ti o wa deede je bayi yipada si awon ero isiro. Won ti njijadu pelu ara won ni ori pe won niyanju fun awon ona orisirisi awon ona iyato, sugbon awon igbiyanju ifigagbaga won se alabapin ati sepo ninu atileyin ajopo fun iseto-ori ati ipilese isiro.

Iyipada atunse keji ti o se iranlowo ninu iyipada-ehin ti onidaase ohun-ini ti ara eni je iyipada ninu awon idibo ipinle. Ni idahun si ipenija ti awon onisowo ohun-ini ikoko, awon ipinle yi awon eya-ara won pada lati odo autocracy oba-oba tabi oligarchy ti o niyanju lati mo iru-ara ti o mo tele ti ijoba tiwantiwa ti a npe ni [^42] Dipo ki o je igbimo ti o ni idinamo si ara re ati / tabi si ipo ijoba nipase ona eto caste tabi ofin kilasi, ofin ti ofin ti wa ni igbimo eyiti o tumo si gbogbo ipo ijoba si gbogbo eniyan ati fifun awon eto gbogbo ti o je deede ati idaniloju ni sise imulo ipinle. Gbogbo eniyan –kii kan "ipo-onu" -igba eto ofin ni ipinle, ati idodi si ofin re duro lati dinku gege bi. Lakoko ti o je pe ohun-ini ati imunwo ni o le dabi enipe, won dabi enipe o kere ju, iru eniyan je ohun ti o je, ni kete ti a ba fun enikan ni anfani lati kopa ninu ilana re, ati pe awon ifojusi ti awon agbara  laarin gbogbo ti tele ni lati wa ibanuje, ni bayi o wa iseduro isowo fun won.

Ni si san owo idiyele ti ijoba tiwantiwa si ofin re, ipinle naa nfa awon ipinnu ti ikede eniyan di pupo lati dinku idiyele ti o daju pe isise ati imukuro je ninu gbogbo awon ifarahan ati awon abajade bakanna bi o se je ati bi o ti pinnu re ati pe ti a se. O tan won dipo ki o gba ifitonileti naa pe iru ise bee ni o ni eto bi o ti je pe a je eri kan ti o so lori won ni ibikan pelu ila ati pe o le ni ibikan ni ipa ninu asayan awon alakoso-ilu.[^43]

Ise  ibaje ti ijoba tiwantiwa gegebi ohun idaniloju fun ibadabo ti agbara ilu ni a ti se apejuwe pelu imoran nla nipase Bertrand de Jouvenel:

> Lati igba kejila titi di ogorun odun kejo si ijoba  ti dagba sii. Awon ilana ti wa ni ye nipase gbogbo awon ti o ri o sele; o ru won sinu apaniyan ati aisedede iwa-ipa. Ni awon akoko nigbamii idagba re ti tesiwaju ni igbiyanju itoju, ati igbesoke re ti mu itesiwaju ti ogun ti o ye. Ati nisisiyi a ko ni oye ilana naa mo, a ko tun se itokasi, a ko tun dahun. Ilana ti wa ni ohun titun, fun agbara ti o ni lati dupe lowo iboju-eri ti o ti fi ara re pamo. Ni isaaju o le ri, o farahan ni eniyan ti oba, eniti ko ko pe o je oluwa oun, ati ninu eniti awon ifekufe eniyan je eyiti a mo. Nisisiyi, ti a koju ni ailoruko, o nperare pe ko ni aye ti ara re, ati pe ki o je ohun elo ti ko ni ipa ti ko ni idaniloju ti gbogbogbo. Sugbon ti o je kedere itan-itan .... Loni bi nigbagbogbo agbara wa ni owo awon egbe ti awon okunrin ti o sakoso ile agbara .... Gbogbo eyiti o ti yipada ni pe o ti ni bayi fun rorun lati pa ijoba naa pada lati yipada awon eniyan ti awon alakoso agbara ti agbara. Ti a wo lati igun kan, eyi n mu agbara lagbara, nitori awon apo ti o sakoso isakoso awujo, le ni awon iyipada ti o wa ni awujo, ti o ni imoran die sii. Sugbon, nipa sisi afojusona agbara si gbogbo awon ebun ti o ni ife, iseto yii je ki ilosiwaju Agbara je rorun pupo. Ni abe * eto isaaju *, awon emi ti n gbe ni awujo, ti won ni, bi won ti mo, ko ni anfani ti ipin kan ti agbara, ni kiakia lati so ebi re kere julo. Nisisiyi, ni ida keji, nigbati gbogbo eniyan ba je iranse, ko si enikan ti o ni itoro lati subu ofiisi kan ti o nfe ni ojo kan funrarare, tabi lati fi iyanrin sinu ero ti o tumo si lilo ara re nigbati akoko ba de. Nitorina ni pe o wa ninu awon isoro oselu ti awujo  kan jakejado igbadun ni igbasile ti agbara. [^44]

The other two adjustments made by the state in order to overcome its lowest point of popularity and rise to its present size have to do with interstate relations. For one thing, as explained earlier and just mentioned again by de Jouvenel, states qua monopolistic exploiters tend to get involved in interstate warfare. With their internal exploitative power weak, the desire to compensate for these losses by external expansion rises. However, this desire is frustrated by a lack of internal support. The support is created through a policy of redistribution, industrial regulation, and democratization. (In fact, states that do not adopt these measures are bound to lose in any long-lasting warfare!) It is this support that is used as a springboard for a realization of the state’s expansionist desires.

Awon atunse meji miiran ti ipinle se lati le segun aaye ti o wa ni ipo ti o kere julo ti o si dide si iwon ti o wa bayi lati ni pelu awon ibatan ilu. Fun ohun kan, gegebi a ti salaye tele ati pe a ti so tele nipase de Jouvenel, awon alakoso monopolistic ti nje deedee maa n se alabapin ninu ijakadi ti kariaye. Pelu agbara agbara ti nsise lowo agbara won, ife lati san owo fun awon adanu wonyi nipase ilosoke ita. Sibesibe, ife yi je ibanuje nipase aini ti atileyin ti inu. A se atileyin atileyin nipase ipilese atunse, ilana isowo, ati tiwantiwa. (Ni otitọ, awọn ipinlẹ ti ko gba awọn ọna wọnyi ni o ni lati padanu ni eyikeyi ogun to gun!) O je atileyin yii ti o lo bi orisun omi fun imudaniloju awon ifekufe ti awon ipinnu ipinle.

Backed by such nationalism, states begin on their expansionist course. For more than a century an almost uninterrupted series of wars and imperialist expeditions set in, each one more brutal and destructive than the previous one, with always greater involvement of the noncombative population, culminating in World War I and II but not ending with this. In the name of the socialist, conservative, or democratic nation, and by means of warfare, states have expanded their territories to sizes compared to which even the Roman Empire appears insignificant, and have actually wiped out or brought under foreign rule a steadily increasing number of culturally distinct nations.[^46]

However, not only external expansion of state power is brought about by the ideology of nationalism. War as the natural outgrowth of nationalism is also the means of strengthening the state’s internal powers of exploitation and expropriation. Each war is also an internal emergency situation, and an emergency requires and seems to justify the acceptance of the state’s increasing its control over its own population. Such increased control gained through the creation of emergencies is reduced during peacetime, but it never sinks back to its pre-war levels. Rather, each successfully ended war (and only successful governments can survive) is used by the government and its intellectuals to propagate the idea that it was only because of nationalistic vigilance and expanded governmental powers that the “foreign aggressors” were crushed and one’s own country saved, and that this successful recipe must then be retained in order to be prepared for the next emergency. Led by the just proven “dominant” nationalism, each successful war ends with the attainment of a new peacetime high of governmental controls and thereby further strengthens a government’s appetite for implementing the next winnable international emergency.[^47]

Each new period of peace means a higher level of governmental interference as compared with the previous one: internally in the form of increased restrictions on the range of choices that private property owners are allowed to make regarding their own property; and externally, as regards foreign relations, in the form of higher trade barriers and of increasingly severe restrictions on population movements (most notably on emigration and immigration). Not the least because it is based on increased discrimination against foreigners and foreign trade, any such peace contains the increased risk of the next international conflict, or pressures the affected governments into negotiating bi- or multilateral interstate-agreements aimed at cartelizing their respective power structures and thereby jointly exploiting and expropriating each other’s populations.[^48]

Finally, the fourth adjustment is made necessary by the other three, and again because of the ongoing process of interstate competition, crises, and warfare. It is less of the state’s own making than are redistribution, democratization, and war-making—just as it is not of its own making that there *is* interstate-competition at all. Rather, in fashionable Hayekian terminology, it is the unintended consequence of the fact that short of one state’s domination of the entire world (which is, of course, every state’s dream!) the continued existence of other states keeps exerting a significant constraint on each state’s size and structure.

Whether intended or unintended, this structural adjustment must also be noted if one wishes to fully understand the development that has led to the present world of statism. It is also only by mentioning this adjustment that the question why it is specifically the *tax*-state that has risen to world dominance is finally answered.

It is easy enough to explain how through a series of nationalistic wars during the nineteenth and twentieth century the states of Western Europe and North America could come to dominate the rest of the world and leave their imprint upon it. Notwithstanding the presently booming cultural relativism, the reason for this is the simple fact that these states were the outgrowth of societies with a superior intellectual tradition—that of Western rationalism—with its central ideas of individual freedom and private property, and that this tradition had laid the foundation for the creation of economic wealth far exceeding that existing anywhere else. Because they parasitically drew on such superior economic wealth, it is not at all surprising that these states were then able to battle all others victoriously.

It is also obvious why with the remarkable exception of a number of Pacific countries most of these defeated and reconstituted non-Western states have to this day utterly failed to significantly improve their international stature or even match that of the Western nation states, and have in particular failed to do so after having reached political independence from Western imperialism. With no endogenous tradition of rationalism and liberalism to speak of, such states naturally felt inclined to imitate or adopt the “victorious” ideological imports of socialism, conservatism, democratism, and nationalism, the very ideologies to which these countries’ intellectual elite had been exposed almost exclusively during their studies at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, London, Paris, Berlin, Harvard, and Columbia. As a matter of course, a brew of such each-and-all statist ideologies, unconstrained by a significant tradition of private property ethic, spells economic disaster, and such a fact more or less rules out any prominent role in international politics.[^49]

Yet what—and it is the answer to this that is somewhat less obvious—if the Western states fight each other? What determines the success in these conflicts, and what is bound to cause defeat?

Naturally, redistribution, democratization, and nationalism cannot be cited again here, for assumedly these states have already adopted such policies in order to regain internal strength and prepare for interstate warfare in the first place. Rather, just as it is the relatively stronger tradition of private property ethic that is responsible for these states’ dominance over the non-Western world, so, *ceteris paribus*, is a relatively more liberal policy responsible for their long run success in the struggle for survival among the Western states themselves. Among them, those states which have adjusted their internal redistributionist policies so as to decrease the importance of a conservatively minded policy of economic regulations relative to that of socialistically inclined policy of taxation tend to outstrip their competitors in the arena of international politics.

Regulations through which states either compel or prohibit certain exchanges between two or more private persons as well as acts of taxation are invasions of private property rights. In pursuing both types of redistributionist policies, the states’ representatives increase their own income at the expense of a corresponding income reduction for someone else. However, while by no means less destructive of productive output than taxation, regulations have the peculiar characteristic of requiring the state’s control over economic resources in order to become enforceable without simultaneously increasing the resources at its disposal. In practice, this is to say that regulations require the state’s command over and expenditure of taxes, yet regulations produce no monetary income for the state but only income in the form of the satisfaction of pure power lust (as when A, for no material gains of his own, outlaws that B and C engage in mutually beneficial trade with each other). On the other hand, taxation and a redistribution of tax revenue according to the principle “from Peter to Paul” increases the economic means at a government’s disposal at least by its own “handling-charge” for the act of redistribution but may produce no other satisfaction (apart from the increased appreciation by the Pauls) than that of actually possessing certain economic resources and being able to expend them according to its own whims.[^50]

Clearly, interstate conflicts and war require economic means, and even more resources the more frequent and longer-lasting such events are. In fact, those states which control more ample economic resources expendable on a war-effort will *ceteris paribus* tend to be victorious. Hence, since a policy of taxation, and taxation without regulation, yields a higher monetary return to the state than a policy of regulation, and of taxation cum regulation, states must willy-nilly move in the direction of a comparatively deregulated economy and a comparatively pure tax-state in order to avoid international defeat.

It is this relative advantage in international politics of the tax-state over the regulatory state that explains the rise of the U.S. to the rank of the world’s foremost imperial power.[^51] It also explains the defeat of such highly regulatory states as Nazi-Germany and Fascist-Italy, the relative weakness of the Soviet Union and its allies as compared to the NATO-alliance, and the recent simultaneous moves toward economic deregulation and increased levels of imperialist aggression of the Reagan and, to a lesser extent, the Thatcher governments.

This concludes my praxeologically informed sociological account of the evolution of the present statist world and the rise, in particular, of the modern tax-state. Based on such an understanding let me end with just a few brief remarks of how it is possible to overcome the tax-state.

It cannot be fought by a simple boycott, as could a private business, because an institution devoted to the business of expropriating and exploiting does not respect the negative verdict revealed by boycotts. It also cannot simply be fought by countering its aggression with defensive violence because the state’s aggression is supported by public opinion. Thus, overcoming it depends on a change in public opinion. The private property ethic—the idea that private property is a just institution and the only means of creating economic prosperity, and the view of the state as an outcast institution that is destructive of wealth formation, must be revived and must again inspire people’s minds and hearts. With the rampant statist ideologies of nationalism, democratism, and redistributionism (of either the socialist or the conservative kind), this may sometimes appear hopeless. However, ideas have changed in the past and can change again in the future. In fact, ideas can change instantaneously.[^52] Moreover, the idea of private property has one decisive attraction: it, and only it, is a true reflection of man’s nature as a rational being.[^53]

[^41]: On this trend see Webber and Wildavsky, *A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World*, pp. 588f.; on redistribution in general see also de Jasay, *The State*, chap. 4.

[^42]: On this trend see Reinhard Bendix, *Kings or People* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978).

[^43]: On the social psychology of democracy see Gaetano Mosca, *The Ruling Class* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1939); H.L. Mencken, *Notes on Democracy* (New York: Knopf, 1926); on the tendency of democratic rule to “degenerate” to oligarchic rule see Robert Michels, *Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens* (Stuttgart: Kroener, 1957).

[^44]: Bertrand de Jouvenel, *On Power* (New York: Viking Press, 1949), pp. 9–10.

[^45]: On nationalism, imperialism, colonialism—and their incompatibility with classical liberalism—see Ludwig von Mises, *Liberalism* (San Francisco: Cobden Press, 1985); idem, *Nation, State and Economy* (New York: New York University Press, l983); Joseph A. Schumpeter, *Imperialism and Social Classes* (New York: World Publishing, 1955); Lance E. Davis and Robert A. Huttenback, *Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: The Political Economy of British Imperialism 1860–1912* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).

[^46]: See Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*; Johnson, *Modern Times*.

[^47]: This process is the central topic of Higgs, *Crisis and Leviathan*.

[^48]: The most vicious of such agreements is very likely that of restricting entry for noncriminal persons wanting to immigrate into a given territory—and the chance for those living in this territory to offer employment to them—and of extraditing them back to their home-countries.

[^49]: On the problem of the so-called Third World see Peter T. Bauer and B.S. Yamey, *The Economics of Under-Developed Countries* (London: Nisbet and Co., 1957); P.T. Bauer, *Dissent on Development* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972); idem, *Equality, The Third World and Economic Delusion* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981); Stanislav Andreski, *The African Predicament* (New York: Atherton Press, 1969); idem, *Parasitism and Subversion* (New York: Pantheon, 1966).

[^50]: On regulation and taxation as different forms of aggression against private property and their economics and sociology see Rothbard, *Power and Market*; Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*.

[^51]: On the imperialistic foreign policy of, in particular, the U.S. see Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*, chap. III, p. 1; and Rothbard, *For a New Liberty*, chap. 14.

[^52]: See on this also Etienne de la Boétie, *The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude*, ed. Murray N. Rothbard (New York: Free Life Editions, 1975).

> Resolve to serve no more, and you are at once freed. I do not ask that you place bands upon the tyrant to topple him over, but simply that you support him no longer; then you will behold him, like a great colossus whose pedestals have been pulled away, fall of his own weight and break into pieces. (pp. 52–53)

[^53]: On the—a prioristic—rational justification of the private property ethic see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “From the Economics of Laissez Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); idem, “The Justice of Economic Efficiency,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter, 1988); infra chaps. 8 and 9.
