#### Ayanfe

Owo je "didoju" tun si anfani. Sibesibe, iwulo, laisi owo, je praxeologically jemo si ise ati oja awujo.

Bi owo je abajade aidaniloju, nitorina awon esi anfani lati igbasile akoko, eyi ti o se pataki fun ise bi ailojuwon (ati ni ori lati se alaye ni kukuru ani die sii be). Ni igbese, oludasiran kan kii se igbiyanju lati se iyipada die sii fun ipo-oro ti ko ni itelorun ati be se afihan iyasoto fun diee sii ju awon oja kekere lo; o gbodo tun se ayewo nigba ti o wa ni ojo iwaju awon afojusun re yoo wa ni (ie, akoko ti o ye lati se won) bakannaa akoko ilosiwaju ti o dara, ati gbogbo awon ise bayi tun nfihan ifarahan gbogbo agbaye fun awon isaaju awon oja lehin ati die sii die sii ju awon ti o to. Igbese gbogbo nilo akoko die lati ni ipinnu re; nitori pe eniyan gbodo je ohun kan nigbakugba ati pe ko le dawo gba gbogbo, akoko je nigba gbogbo ailopin. Bayi, * ceteris paribus *, bayi tabi awon nkan isaaju ti wa ni, ati pe o gbodo je, wulo ju die lo ju ojo iwaju tabi awon nigbamii lo.[^11] Ni otito, ti eniyan ko ba ni idiwo nipase ayipada akoko ati idiwo kan ti o sise ni pe o fe die sii si kere si, o yoo wa ni igbagbogbo yan awon irujade awon ilana ti yoo mu oja ti o tobi julo jade fun tite sii, laibikita ipari akoko ti a nilo fun awon ona wonyi lati so eso. Fu Fun apeere, dipo ti ko iso ipeja akoko, Crusoe yoo bere sii ke irin-ateja ipeja, gegebi ona ti isowo ti iselopo fun wiwa eja Pe ko si enikeni, pelu Crusoe, se ni ona yii o je ki o han pe eniyan ko le se "awon igberiko iye owo ti akoko kanna ni ona ti o yato si bi won ti sunmoti tabi lati tun pada lati igbasile ti ipinnu osere naa."[^12]

Bayi, ti o ni idiwo nipa akoko, eniyan yoo paaro ohun ti o dara bayi lodi si ojo iwaju ti o ba je pe o ni lati mu ki o poju awon ohun-ini iwaju. Awon osuwon ti akoko ayanfe, eyi ti o le je yato si lati eniyan si eniyan ati lati ikankan kan ni akoko si ekeji, sugbon eyi ti ko le je nkankan sugbon ti o dara fun gbogbo eniyan, nigbakannaa ipinnu iye ti Ere ti o wa lowo oja ni awon ojo iwaju bi daradara bi iye awon ifowopamo ati idoko-owo. Osuwon iwuwo ti iwulo ni idajo iye owo gbogbo awon osuwon akoko, afihan, beeni lati so, iye osuwon awujo ti igbado akoko, ati isokan awon ifowopamo ti owo (tumo pe, ipese awon oja ti o wa bayi fun pipasipaaro si awon nkan iwaju) ati awujo idoko (tumo pe, ibere fun awon oja ti o wa lowolowo ti o ni ojo iwaju yoo pada).

ko si ipese ti awon owo-ti o ni agbara ti o le se laisi iseduro isaaju, bii laisi idaduro lati die ninu awon agbara ti awon oja ti o wa bayi. Pelupelu, ko si ibeere fun awon owo ti o ni agbara ti o le je ti ko ba si enikan lati woye eyikeyi anfani lati lo awon oja ti o wa ni fifo (bii, lati dawo won sile ki o le se oja ti o wa iwaju ti yoo koja ifowosi lowolowo). Nitooto, ti o ba je pe gbogbo awon oja ti o wa bayi ti run ati pe ko si owo ti o ni awon iseduro ti o nlo akoko, ko ni anfani tabi osuwon ayanfe akoko, tabi dipo, iye owo osuwon yoo wa ni giga, eyiti o wa ni ita ti Ogba Edeni, lati se igbadun igbesi aye igbesi aiye ti ayeraye nipa didoro otito pelu ohun kan bikose okan ti o fa owo ati laisi nkankan bikose ife fun idunnu igbadun.

Ipese ati iwuwo fun owo nikan waye –ati eyi ni ipo eniyan –ni kete ti o ba mo pe aise-taara, die e sii, awon ilana igbiyanju gigun le mu oja ti o tobi tabi ti o dara julo jade nipase tite ju awon ohun ti o rorun ati kukuru;[^13] ati pe o see se, nipase awon ifowopamo, lati safikun iye awon oja ti o wa lowolowo lati pese fun gbogbo awon ti o nilo ifokanbale lakoko idaduro ti a ti pe die ti o ye ju amojuto ju igbiyanju lo ni ireti ti ola iwaju ti a reti lati igbasile ti die sii akoko-n gba ilana gboogi.[^14]

Niwon igba ti eyi ba je oran, ipile ikeko ati akopo yoo seto sinu ati tesiwaju. Dipo ti a se atileyin nipase ati sise ni awon igbese ti o ni igbadun daradara, awon idi akoko ti isawari, ile ati isise, ni atileyin nipase opo ti sise lori ikuna ati lilo ni sise awon oja-ori. Awon wonyi ko ni iye kankan ayafi ti awon oja agbedemeji ninu ilana ti titan awon oja ikehin (onibara). Ni gbolohun miran, iye won wa ni otito pe enikeni ti o ni won le lo lati se awon oja-agbara miiran die sii daradara. Iye owo ti o po ju owo lo ti o san lori awon idiwon ti o ni idiwon ti o nilo fun ise re je nitori iyato akoko yii ati otito gbogbo akoko. O je owo ti a san fun rira akoko; fun gbigbesi sunmo si ipari ti ipinnu ikeko okan sugbon ju nini lati bere ni ibere. Nitori iyasoto akoko, iye ti o je ikehin gbodo koja iye owo ti a lo lori awon ifosiwewe re (idiyele ti a san fun olu-ilu daradara ati gbogbo awon ise ti n se afikun).

Ni isale iwon osuwon akoko, lehinna, awon isaaju ilana ikeko ti iselopo yoo seto sinu, ati pe o yarayara o yoo mu fifo ona ti isafihan. Iyokuro eyikeyi ninu ikojopo awon ohun-ini ati ni iseduro ti iseto-ise ti o wa ni titan n mu ise-sise alailegbe ti ise. Eyi niyo risi boya ise ti o po si ati / tabi awon osuwon owo sisan, ati, ni eyikeyi ọran (paapaa ti igbiyanju ise ti nsise ni o ye ki o pada sehin pelu ilosoke ilosiwaju), si iye owo ti o ga julo. [^15] Pese pelu iye owo ti o po Awon oja lehinna, awon ti o sanwo ti o sanwo julo ti awon oluse oya yoo je ohun ti o poju-ojo-iwaju-oja-aje, ti o poju nikehin, lehin ti awon osise, tun ni awon owo gidi ti awon onihun ti olu-ile ati ile. Lakoko ti o ti ni anfani (akoko akoko) bayi ni ibatan ti o se deede si se ati owo-ori owo, ko ni ohunkohun ti o se pelu owo. Lati dajudaju, ni isuna oro-aje kan tun wa iseduro isowo fun idaamu osuwon fun akoko. Sibesibe eyi ko yi o daju pe iwulo ati owo je ominira ti isakoso ona ati aifowole, ati ife ni "gidi," kii se nkan ti isowo. Ni otito, ni ile ti iwontun-aye ti kii se lailai ko ni aaye fun owo nitoripe ojo iwaju nipa itumo yoo je daju ati pelu gbogbo ailopin aiyokuro kuro ko si okan yoo ni eyikeyi nilo fun awon ohun-ini owo (eniti idi idi kan je, owo ko je ti o ni agbara tabi agbara, lati pese okan fun awon rira ti a ko iti mo sibesibe ni awon ojo ti ko iti mo). Akoko ati iwulo, sibesibe, ko le loyun bi bi o ti npadanu ani lehinna. Fun paapaa ni iwontun-die, o nilo lati wa ni itoju nigbagbogbo ni akoko igba (bii ki o se idiwo fun lati di die ninu igba ti o je atunse ti a ko le tun se fun awon ise sise). Ko si iru itoju be, sibesibe, laisi awon ifowopamo ati awon ilosiwaju ti nlo lowo: ati pe ko si iru awon nkan bii awon wonyi laisi idaduro fun iye osuwon anfani. (Nitooto, ti o ba je pe osuwon anfani ti a sanwo je odo, agbara agbara yoo mu, ati okan yoo yo kuro ni ijerisi.) [^16]

Matters become somewhat more complex under conditions of uncertainty, with money actually in use, but the praxeological independence of money and interest remains fully intact. Under these conditions, man invariably has three instead of two alternatives as to how to allocate his current income. He must not only decide how much to allocate to the purchase of present goods and how much to future goods (i.e., how much to consume and how much to invest), but also how much to keep in cash. There are no other alternatives. Yet while man must at all times make adjustments concerning three margins at once, invariably the outcome is determined by two distinct and praxeologically unrelated factors. The consumption/investment proportion is determined by time preference. The source of the demand for cash, on the other hand, is the utility attached to money (i.e., its usefulness in allowing immediate purchases of directly serviceable goods at uncertain future dates). Both factors can vary, independent of one another.

If the supply of money changes, or if the demand for money changes with a given social stock of money, the purchasing power of money will also change. However, aside from causing changes in relative incomes, no such changes in a money unit’s purchasing power would have any effect on overall real income. Incomes in terms of money increase or decrease, yet the purchasing power of money correspondingly falls or rises, leaving real income unchanged. Or, with money incomes unchanged, more or less of it will be held in cash (hoarded), but then the purchasing power of money correspondingly rises or falls, once again leaving the real income purchased with a smaller or larger sum of money unaltered. It is this real income, however, not money as such, to which a man’s time preference schedule is related, and in light of which his effective rate of time preference is determined. Since real income does not change through all these monetary changes, there is no reason to suppose that the rate of time preference will. If, for instance, the Keynesian nightmare of increased hoarding becomes reality and prices generally fall while the purchasing power of money correspondingly rises, this will leave the real investment/consumption proportion entirely unaffected. Unless the time preference schedule is assumed to have changed at the same time, the additional hoards will be drawn from funds that formerly were spent on consumption and from funds that formerly went into investment in the same pre-established proportion, so as to leave real consumption and real investment at precisely their old levels. However, if time-preference is assumed to change concomitantly, then everything is possible. Indeed, if the additional hoards come exclusively from previous consumption spending, an increased demand for money can go hand in hand even with a fall in the rate of interest and increased investment. Yet this is due not to changes in the demand for money but exclusively to a change (a fall) in the time preference schedule.[^17]

#### The Capitalist Process

With the division of labor established and extended to its ultimate limit via the development of a universal medium of exchange, the process of economic development is essentially determined by time preference.

To be sure, there are other factors that are important: the quality and quantity of the population, the endowment with nature-given resources, and the state of technology. Yet of these, the quality of a people is largely beyond anyone’s control and must be taken as a given: the quantity of a population may or may not advance economic development, depending on whether the population is below or above its optimum size for a given-sized territory: and nature-given resources or technological know-how can only have an economic impact if discovered and utilized. To do this, though, there must be prior savings and investment. It is not the availability of resources and technical or scientific knowledge that imposes limits on economic advancement: rather, it is time preference that imposes limits on the exploitation of actually available resources as well as on the utilization of existing knowledge (and also on scientific progress for that matter, insofar as research activities, too, must be supported by saved-up funds).

Thus, the only viable path toward economic growth is through savings and investment, governed as they are by time preference. Ultimately there is no way toward prosperity except through an increase in the per capita quota of invested capital. This is the only way to increase the marginal productivity of labor and only if this is done can future income rise in turn. With real incomes rising, the effective rate of time preference falls (without, however, ever reaching zero or even becoming negative), adding still further increased doses of investment, and setting in motion an upward spiraling process of economic development.

There is no reason to suppose that this process should come to a halt short of reaching the Garden of Eden where all scarcity has disappeared—unless people deliberately choose otherwise and begin to value additional leisure more highly than any further increase in real incomes. Nor is there any reason to suppose that the process of capitalist development would be anything but smooth and that the economy would flexibly adjust not only to all monetary changes but to all changes in the social rate of time preference as well. Of course, so long as the future is uncertain, there will be entrepreneurial errors, losses, and bankruptcies. But no systematic reason exists why this should cause more than temporary disruptions, or why these disruptions should exceed, or drastically fluctuate around, a “natural rate” of business failures.[^18]

Matters become different only if an extra-market institution such as government is introduced. It not only makes involuntary unemployment possible, as explained above: the very existence of an agency that can effectively claim ownership over resources which it has neither homesteaded, produced, nor contractually acquired, also raises the social rate of time preference for homesteaders, producers, and contractors, and hence creates involuntary impoverishment, stagnation, or even regression. It is only through government that mankind can be stopped on its natural course toward a gradual emancipation from scarcity long before ever reaching the point of a voluntarily chosen zero-growth.[^19] And it is in the presence alone of a government, that the capitalist process can possibly take on a cyclical (rather than a smooth) pattern, with busts following booms. Exempt from the rules of private property acquisition and transfer, government naturally desires a monopoly over money and banking and wants nothing better than to engage in fractional reserve (deposit) banking—in nontechnical terms: monopolistic counterfeiting—so as to enrich itself at the expense of others through the much less conspicuous means of fraud rather than through outright confiscation.[^20] Boom and bust cycles are the outcome of fraudulent fractional reserve banking. If and insofar as the newly created counterfeit money enters the economy as additional supplies on the credit market, the rate of interest will have to fall below what it otherwise would have been. Credit must become cheaper. Yet at a lower price more credit is taken, and more resources then are invested in the production of future goods (instead of being used for present consumption) than otherwise would have been. The roundaboutness of the entire production structure is lengthened. In order to complete all investment projects that now are underway, more time is needed than that required to complete those begun before the credit expansion. All the goods which would have been created without credit expansion must be produced; plus those that are newly added. For this to be possible, however, more capital is required. The larger amount of future goods can only be produced successfully if additional savings provide for a fund of means of sustenance sufficiently large to bridge, and carry workers through, the longer waiting time. But, by assumption, no such increase in savings has taken place. The lower interest rate is not the result of a larger supply of capital goods. The social rate of time preference has not changed at all. It is solely the result of counterfeit money entering the economy through the credit market. It follows logically that it must be considered impossible to successfully complete all investment projects underway after a credit expansion due to a systematic lack of real capital. Projects will have to be liquidated so as to shorten the overall production structure and to readjust it to an unchanged rate of social time preference and the corresponding real investment-consumption proportion.[^21]

These cyclical movements can neither be avoided by expecting them (according to the motto “a cycle anticipated is a cycle avoided”): They are the praxeologically necessary consequence of additional counterfeit credit being successfully placed. Once this is the case, a boom-bust cycle is inevitable, regardless of what actors correctly or incorrectly believe or expect. The cycle is induced by a monetary change, but it takes effect in the realm of “real” phenomena and will be a “real” cycle no matter what beliefs people happen to hold.[^22]

Nor can it be realistically expected that the inevitable cyclical movements resulting from an expansion of credit will ever come to a halt: So long as an extra-market institution like government is in control of money, a permanent series of cyclical movements will mark the process of economic development. For through the creation of fraudulent credit, a government can engender a smooth and highly inconspicuous income and wealth redistribution in its own favor. There is no reason (short of angelic assumptions) to suppose that it would ever deliberately stop using this magic wand merely because credit expansion has the “unfortunate” side-effect of business cycles.

[^11]: On the time preference theory of interest see William Stanley Jevons, *Theory of Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1965); Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, *Capital and Interest*, 3 vols. (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1959); Richard von Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion* (Vienna: Julius Springer, 1934 [Engl. trans., Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988]); Frank Fetter, *Capital, Interest, and Rent* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1971); Roger Garrison, “In Defense of the Misesian Theory of Interest,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979); idem, “Professor Rothbard and the Theory of Interest,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^12]: Mises, *Human Action,* p. 483.

[^13]: To be sure, not all lengthier production processes are more productive than shorter ones; but under the assumption that man, constrained by time-preference, will invariably and at all times select the shortest conceivable methods of producing some given output, any increase in output then can—praxeologically—only be achieved if the production structure is lengthened.

[^14]: Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 490ff.

[^15]: See also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 663f.

[^16]: See also Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 530–32; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 385–86.

[^17]: See also Murray N. Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975), pp. 39–41.

[^18]: See also Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 12–17.

[^19]: On the role of government as destructive of wealth formation, see in particular Murray N. Rothbard, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989); idem, “The Economics of Sociology and Taxation,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* (1990); supra chap. 2.

[^20]: See in particular Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking*; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Banking, Nation States, and International Politics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 4 (1990); supra chap. 3; idem, “Marxist and Austrian Class Analysis,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 9, no. 2 (1990); supra chap. 4; idem, “European Economic Integration and the ECU,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (1989).

[^21]: On the theory of the business cycle see Mises’s original contribution in his *Theory of Money and Credit*, part III, chap. 5; his first elaborate version is *Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik* (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928), the English translation of which did not appear until 1978 in Ludwig von Mises, *On the Manipulation of Money and Credit* (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Free Market Books, 1978); F.A. Hayek, *Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle* (New York: A.M. Kelley, 1966); idem, *Prices and Production* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1967); Hayek’s works were first published in 1929, resp. l93l; it is interesting to note that Hayek, who received the Nobel prize in 1974, the year after Mises’s death, for his contributions to the Mises-Hayek theory of the business cycle, obviously misrepresents Mises’s achievements as regards the development of this theory: In his *Prices and Production* of 1931, the first presentation of the Austrian business cycle theory to appear in English, he acknowledges Mises’s prior claim to fame. Yet even though he cites Mises’s above mentioned 1928 work, he falsely claims that Mises’s contributions to the theory were essentially confined to a few remarks in his original work of 1912; see chap. 3 fn. 1 in *Prices and Production*; Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion*; Lionel Robbins, *The Great Depression* (Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1971); Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*; Ludwig von Mises, et al., *The Austrian Theory of the Trade Cycle and Other Essays* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1983); Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung*, chap. 3; Roger Garrison, “Hayekian Trade Cycle Theory: A Reappraisal,” *Cato Journal* 6, no. 2 (1986); idem, “The Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle in the Light of Modern Macroeconomics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1988).

[^22]: See also Roger Garrison, “‘Rational Expectations’ Offers Nothing That’s Both New and True,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* 6, no. 1 (1985); idem, “The Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle in Light of Modern Macroeconomics” esp. pp. 19–23. See also the critique of psychological—as opposed to praxeological—business cycle theories below.
