## Awon aje ati Owo-ori 

Gegebi akole ori ori tokasi, Mo ti seto ara mi ni awon afojusun meji. Ni akoko, Mo fe lati salaye idiyele aje ti owo-ori. Eyi apakan ori ori yii n se apejuwe awon ti praxeological analysis owo-ori  ati pe iru eyi ko ye ki a reti lati lo ju ohun ti awon oro-aje miiran ti so tele.

Die e sii ni a le ri ni apakan keji, nibi ti Emi yoo gbiyanju lati dahun ibeere naa: idi ti o wa ni owo-ori; ati idi ti o je nigbagbogbo die sii ti e? Idahun iru ibeere bee kii se ise ti isiro oro-aje sugbon ti a fun ni imoran nipa iseduro pelu iseduro tabi ti isaju itumo imo-ara tabi imo-itan ati awon atunse, ati lati ibere pupo die sii fun aaye.

## #

Lati so pe ko si ohun titun lati so nipa awon ipa aje ti owo-ori je kii se so pe ohun ti o wa * kii* yoo je iroyin fun opolopo. Ni otito, lẹhin ti o n sawari awon iwe-eko imo-oro ti o gbajumo julo, o dabi pe ohun ti mo ni lati so je awon iroyin si opolopo awon oni-oro ati awon akeko oni-oro. Niwon bi awon oro wonyi se n se abojuto ti owo-ori  effa aje, lehin igbasile apejuwe ti o yato si awon orisirisi eto owo-ori ati awon idagbasoke itan won [^1], won ti ferere ni ipalolo lori ibeere ti ohun ti awon ipa-ori gbogbo je. Pelusi, kini ninu ijiroro won nipa isoro owo ori-oro ti awon oro wonyi so nipa awon ipa aje ti awon iru-ori-ori kan pato je nigba gbogbo.

Sibesibe, igbimo yii ni afihan ilana ti aisedede ogbon. Ni ibere 150 odun seyin fere ohun gbogbo ti o ye ki o yeye loni nipa oro-aje ti owo-ori ti a ti so daradara ati ni idaniloju nipase iru eniyan pataki kan ninu itan-oro ti oro-isowo bi Jean Baptiste so ninu re * Treatise on Political Economy *.

Ni idakeji si awon onkowe iwe eko oni, awon ti o se apejuwe ijiroro ti awon owo-ori si awon agbegbe alailegbe  laarin awon architectonic gbogbo ti awon iwe won, lati ibere So daradara pe nkan naa ni labe ori akole “Ninu Itoju Oro.”

O lehinna o se afihan asewadi ati iseduro owo-ori bi ikolu lori ati ijiya ti isawari ati sise ohun-ini, eyi ti o je dandan si idinku ninu iselopo ti oro ti o wa ninu iru ohun ini ati si fifun ipo igbesi aye gbogbogbo.

Akosile ni pe:

>  O je asan ti o taye lati se irori, pe owo-ori se afihan awon oro orile-ede, nipa gbigbe ara kan ninu awon irugbin ile, o si je ki orile-ede naa di oloro nipa gbigbe apakan ninu awon oloro re.[^2]
>
> Owo-ori ni gbigbe ti ipin kan ti awon oja orile-ede lati owo awon eni-kookan si awon ti ijoba, fun idi ti ipade agbara ilu tabi inawo. Ohunkohun ti o je oruko ti o jeri, boya owo-ori, ilowosi, ise, itoju, asa, iranlowo, iranlowo owo, fifunni, tabi ebun ofe, o je fere kan erù ti a gbekale lori awon eni-kookan, boya ni ipo ototo tabi ajosepo, nipase agbara ase fun akoko naa, fun idi ti fifi agbara si agbara ti o le ronu dara lati se ni owo laise won; ni kukuru, gbigbe lori, ni ori gangan. [^3]

Niwon igba ti awon imoran ti o ni imoran dabi eni pe a ti gbagbe, tabi o kere ju ko han gbangba loni, je ki mi, gegebi ise akoko mi, tun se igbasile iwe iroyin ati alaye fun oro ariyanjiyan ti Arun ati eto re, ati ni iru be se idajo die ninu awon gbajumo  “awon atunse” nrare lati fihan pe owo-ori ko nilo idaduro idasile ti ipa ati oro. Emi yoo ṣe afihan ẹtan otito to ṣe pataki ninu imoran iwe-eke kika deede ti isiro-ori-owo.

Ti owo-ori –akoko ati ju gbogbo –je ati pe o gbodo ni oye bi ona fun iparun ohun ini ati oro-ipile ti o tele lati imoran ti o rorun ti itumo ti itumo ti owo-ori.

Idawo owo-ori je ifagbarase, ai-seadehun ti  ni idaniloju ti awọn ohun-ini ti ara pataki (pupo julo, sugbon kii se iyasoto owo), ati iye ti o wa ninu won, lati odo eniyan tabi egbe awon eniyan ti o koko ni awon ohun ini wonyi ati awon ti o le ti gba owo-ori lati siwaju sii dani won, si elomiran, ti o ni won bayi o si ni bayi ni o ni irisi owo lati se bee. Bawo ni awon ohun-ini wonyi se wa si owo awon onihun won akoko? Ilana ti so pe eyi ni abajade ti owo-ori ti isaaju ti tele, ati pe o le nikan pe awon ohun-ini naa ni a le fi owo-ori se ti a ko ti run tabi ti iye re ko ti pari nipa awon ise ti agbara (olupe-owo ko gba kuro egbin eniyan miiran sugbon awon ohun elo re ti o niyelori nigbagbogbo!), awon meta ati awon ona meta nikan tele: Won wa sinu ohun ini okan boya nipase enikan ti o ni imoran awon ohun elo ti a fun ni iseda ti o ni idiwon ati pe o ti mu won wa sinu ohun-ini kan saaju ki enikeni ti o ti ri ki o si se be; nipa fifi wọn ṣe nipase lilo ise kan lati iru be tele tabi nipase atinuwa, adehun ti isowo lati odo oludaniloju isaaju tabi o sise. Nikan nipase awon iru ise wonyi je okan ti o lagbara lati ra ati pe o po si niyelori –ati nibi awọn –ohun owo-ori . Awon ise ti isafihan atileba je ohun kan ti ko si okan ti o ti ri tele bi orisun owo-ori ti o seese si ohun-ini-owo-nile; ise isejade ni ohun iyebiye ni ohun die ti o niyelori; ati pasipaaro ise didapo pelu awon iyipada ati atunse ti awon ohun-ini kan lati owo awon ti o se iyebiye ohun ini won kere si awon ti o se iyebiye won.

Lati eyi  ni o tele pe iru owo-ori eyikeyi tumo si idinku owo  ti eniyan le reti lati gba lati isodotun atileba, lati sise, tabi lati se adehun. Niwon awon ise wonyi nilo ise ti awon ona kekere –ni akoko kere ati lilo ara –ara-eyi ti o le see lo fun lilo ati / tabi akoko isinmi, iye owo anfani fun fun imuduro, siseda, ati idaniloju je dinku, ati lilo ile-ise alabawon ti agbara ati awon ayeye po. Gegebi, yoo je ifarahan lati lo kuro ni ipo isaaju ati sinu awon ti o kehin. [^4]

Thus, by coercively transferring valuable, not yet consumed assets from their producers (in the wider sense of the term including appropriators and contractors) to people who have not produced them, taxation reduces producers’ present income and their presently possible level of consumption. Moreover, it reduces the present incentive for future production of valuable assets and thereby also lowers future income and the future level of available consumption. Taxation is not just a punishment of consumption without any effect on productive efforts; it is also an assault on production as the only means of providing for and possibly increasing future income and consumption expenditure. By lowering the present value associated with future-directed, value-productive efforts, taxation raises the effective rate of time preference, i.e., the rate of originary interest and, accordingly, leads to a shortening of the period of production and provision and so exerts an inexorable influence of pushing mankind into the direction of an existence of living from hand to mouth. Just increase taxation enough, and you will have mankind reduced to the level of barbaric animal beasts.

Straightforward as such reasoning may seem, there are a number of popular objections raised against it. For instance, from the side of economists who falsely conceive of economics as an empirical science that produces nothing but hypothetical explanations which invariably must be tested against empirical evidence in order to be validated (analogous to the situation in the natural sciences), the following argument is frequently heard: Empirically, it has been observed repeatedly that a rise in the level of taxation was actually accompanied by a rise (not a fall) in GNP or other measures of productive output; hence, the above reasoning, however plausible, must be considered empirically invalid. In fact, some empiricists of this sort go even further and make the stronger claim that taxation actually helps increase the standard of living as evidenced by the fact that some countries with once low standards of living and low levels of taxation now enjoy a much greater wealth with much higher taxes.

Both objections are simply confused. Experience cannot beat logic, and interpretations of observational evidence which are not in line with the laws of logical reasoning are no refutation of these but the sign of a muddled mind (or would one accept someone’s observational report that he had seen a bird that was red and non-red all over at the same time as a refutation of the law of contradiction rather than the pronouncement of an idiot?).

As regards the stronger thesis, it is nothing but a beautiful illustration of the ever so attractive *post hoc ergo propter hoc* fallacy. From the fact that the correlated events of high taxation and wealth were to be observed later than those of low taxation and wealth it is inferred that increased taxation increases wealth. Yet to reason in this way is about as convincing as the argument—justly ridiculed by Say—that one can observe rich men consuming more than poor ones; therefore, their high level of consumption must be responsible for the fact that they are rich.[^5] Just as it follows from the meaning of consumption that this is impossible and that, on the contrary, the rich are not rich because of their high level of consumption but because they previously abstained from consumption and engaged instead in value-productive actions, so it follows from the meaning of taxation that mankind cannot have prospered because of higher levels of taxation but despite such a fact.

The weaker thesis—that experience would at least disprove any claim of a relationship between taxation and productive output that was negative by necessity—is also off the mark. The praxeological reasoning presented above does not at all rule out what empiricist economists falsely interpret as a refutation. In this earlier discussion the conclusion had been reached that the effect of taxation is a relative reduction in the production of valuable assets—a reduction, that is, as compared with the level of output that would have been produced had there been no taxation at all or had the level of taxation not been raised. Nothing was said or implied with respect to the absolute level of the output of valuable assets. As a matter of fact, absolute growth of GNP, for instance, is not only compatible with our earlier praxeological analysis, but can even be seen as a perfectly normal phenomenon to the extent that advances in productivity are possible and actually take place. If it has become possible through improvements in the technology of production to produce a higher output with an identical input (in terms of cost), or a physically identical output with a reduced input, then the coincidence of increased taxation and an increased output of valuable assets is anything but surprising. However, this does not in the least affect the validity of what has been stated about relative impoverishment resulting from taxation. With a given state of technological knowledge, though it may change over time, and taxation being what it is (a punishment of value-productive efforts), the level of productive output must be lower than the one that could have been attained with the same knowledge and no or lower taxation. Statistical studies here are entirely beside the point: they can neither help strengthen it, nor can they ever be used to weaken it.

Another theoretical objection which enjoys some popularity is that imposing or raising taxes leads to a reduction of income derived from the assets taxed; that this reduction raises the marginal utility of such assets as compared to what can be derived from other forms of activity; and thus, instead of lowering it, taxation actually helps increase the tendency to engage in production. For the usual case of taxing money assets this is to say that taxes reduce monetary income which raises the marginal utility of money, and this in turn increases the incentive to attain monetary returns. This argument, to be sure, is perfectly true as far as it goes. However, it is a misconception to believe that it does anything to invalidate the relative impoverishment thesis that I have advanced. First of all, in order to keep the record straight it should be noted that even if it were true—as the just presented argument seems to suggest, albeit falsely as we will see—that increased taxation does not lead to a relatively lower output of valuable assets produced since it spurs a proportional increase in workaholism, it is still the case that the income of value-productive individuals has fallen. Even if they produce the same output as previously, they can only do so if they expend more labor now than before. Since any additional labor expenditure implies forgone leisure or consumption (leisure or consumption which they otherwise could have enjoyed along with the same output of valuable assets), their overall standard of living must be lower.[^6]

It now becomes apparent why the assumption that taxation can leave the productive output of valuable assets unaffected and exclusively cripple consumption is fatally flawed. If taxation reduces one’s income (which includes that derived from present consumption and leisure), and given the universal fact of time preference, that is, that human actors invariably prefer present goods over future goods (that they cannot do without continuous consumption and can engage in lengthier, more roundabout methods of production only if a provision in the form of consumption goods has been made for the corresponding waiting period), then it necessarily follows that a person’s effective rate of time preference must have been raised through this very act (the disutility of waiting must have increased), and that he will have to shorten the length of the structure of production as compared to the one that he otherwise would have chosen. Accordingly, his output of valuable assets available at future dates will have to be lower than would be the case otherwise. If with lower or no taxation his income had been higher and his time preference schedule being given (whatever it happens to be at any particular point in time), he would have invested in lengthier production processes. As a consequence, his output of valuable future assets would have been relatively greater.[^7]

The error in the thesis that taxation can have a neutral effect on production lies in the fact that time preference is not taken into account. The argument presently under scrutiny is quite correct in pointing out that taxation implies a twofold signal: on the one hand the substitution effect working in favor of consumption and leisure and against work; and on the other hand the income effect of raising the marginal utility of the taxed asset. However, it is false to interpret this simplistically as a mixed bag of contradictory signals—one in favor of and one against work—so that one can then state nothing of a categorical nature regarding the effects of taxation on production, and the question of whether or not taxation provides for a lower or a higher output of valuable assets must be conceived of as an entirely empirical one.[^8] For in fact, the signal of taxation is not contradictory at all once it has been recognized that it is being sent to persons whose actions are invariably constrained by time preference. For such actors there exists not only the alternative between work and no work at all but also one between producing a valuable asset in more or less time-consuming ways. Invariably, they must also choose between obtaining an asset quickly and directly, with little waiting time involved, but at the price of having to resort to less efficient methods of production (the famous fisherman who decides to use his bare hands to catch fish in order to obtain it more quickly than by going through more roundabout methods of production), or obtaining it through more productive methods but then having to wait longer for them to bear fruit (the fisherman who, lured by higher future returns, decides to endure a longer waiting period and first builds a net). However, given these choices, the message of taxation is completely unambiguous and unequivocal, and there can no longer be any question that the substitution effect must be thought of as systematically dominating any income effect: If there is not only the option of having something or not having it but also of having less of something sooner or more of it later, the double message sent through taxation is easily integrated and translated into one: reduce the waiting time; shorten the roundabout methods of production! By doing so, valuable assets will be obtained earlier—in line with their increased marginal utility. Simultaneously, in shortening the waiting period, more room will be given for leisure—in line with its increased marginal utility. By reducing the length of roundabout methods of production the two seemingly contradictory signals stemming from taxation are simultaneously accounted for. Contrary to any claim of a systematically “neutral” effect of taxation on production, the consequence of any such shortening of roundabout methods of production is a lower output produced. The price that invariably must be paid for taxation, and for every increase in taxation, is a coercively lowered productivity that in turn reduces the standard of living in terms of valuable assets provided for future consumption. Every act of taxation necessarily exerts a push away from more highly capitalized, more productive production processes in the direction of a hand-to-mouth-existence.

[^1]: Exclusively descriptive analyses of taxation are given, for instance, by Paul Samuelson, *Economics*, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), chap. 9; Roger L. Miller, *Economics Today*, 6th ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), chap. 6.

[^2]: Jean Baptiste Say, *A Treatise on Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1964), pp. 446–47.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 446; on Say’s economic analysis of taxation see also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (Fall, 1981), esp. pp. 551–54.

[^4]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), chap. 12.8; idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 4, 1–3.

[^5]: See Say, A Treatise on Political Economy, p. 448.

[^6]: See on this point also Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 95f.

[^7]: One might object here that the tax receipts will come into someone’s hands—those of government officials or of governmental transfer-paymentrecipients—and that their increased income, resulting in a lower effective time preference rate for them, may offset the increase in this rate on the taxpayers’ side and hence leave the overall rate and the structure of production unchanged. Such reasoning, however, is categorically flawed: For one thing, insofar as government expenditure is concerned, it cannot be regarded as investment at all. Rather, it is consumption, and consumption alone. For, as Rothbard has explained,

> [i]n any sort of division-of-labor economy, capital goods are built, not for their own sake by the investor, but in order to use them to produce lower-order and eventually consumers’ goods. In short, a characteristic of an investment expenditure is that the good in question is not being used to fulfill the needs of the investor, but of someone else—the consumer. Yet, when government confiscates resources from the private market economy, it is precisely defying the wishes of the consumers; when government invests in any good, it does so to serve the whims of government officials, not the desires of consumers. (*Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 816–17)

Thus, government expenditure, by definition, cannot be conceived of as lengthening the production structure and hence as counterbalancing the taxpayers’ raised time preference rate.—On the other hand,

> as for the *transfer* expenditures made by the government (including the salaries of bureaucrats and subsidies to privileged groups), it is true that some of this will be saved and invested. These investments, however, will not represent the voluntary desires of consumers, but rather investments in fields of production *not* desired by the *producing* consumers…. Once let the tax be eliminated, and … the new investments called forth by the demands of the specially privileged will turn out to be *malinvestments*. (*Power and Market*, p. 98)

Consequently, transfer expenditures also cannot be conceived of as compensating for the fact that taxpayers shorten the length of the production structure. All such expenditures can do is to lengthen the structure of mal-production. “At any rate” concludes Rothbard,

> the amount consumed by the government insures that the effect of income taxation will be to raise time-preference ratios and to reduce saving and investment. (Ibid., p. 98)

[^8]: See for such—irrelevant—empirical studies regarding the relative importance of income vs. substitution effects George F. Break, “The Incidence and Economic Effects of Taxation,” in *The Economics of Public Finance* (Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1974), pp. 180ff.; A.B. Atkinson and Joseph E. Stiglitz, *Lectures on Public Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1980), pp. 48ff.; Stiglitz, *Economics of the Public Sector* (New York: Norton, 1986), p. 372.
