### Imogbonwa ati ifiwe ninu sciencii adayeba ati awuyo


Oye imogbonwa sope omokunrin ni agbara lati moo ye ipile ati ofin oye. Omo wipe gbogbo imo ti a gbodo mo bi eyan shen jiyan nipa oye Kankan(nigbana, a o le farakan tori oje ipo ero tonitunmo)je idajo lori tabi oni imule. Ofin itakora je apere imo yii. Jubeelo, oye imogbon wa fi eleyii mule labe nini sokan otito to julo, omo kunrin ni agbara fun ilosiwaju sciencii.

Ifiwera tako iwa ipile oye ati wiwa ilosiwaju sciencii.

Oribi wipe eri kekere tabi aileri wa fun atileyin imogbonwa sciencii adayeba. A o le shaisope itan sciencii adayeba je ikan lara awon toni itesiwaju nigba kugba, ati wipe omo kunrin ti mo nipa idayeba ti o si ju ti atijo lo. Jubeelo,ona bi logiki propositionali, arithmetiki, eucleadeani, geometri,mekanik to wa rationali,(classical mechaniksi ti o ni gravitationi) ati chronometry, gbogbo eyi ti a pe ni protophysics she apeere ero to mogbonwa ti imo ti a ti shawari. Logiki ati protofisiki gbodo ni ero tele ti eyan bama so oun ti o ni itumo rara, tabi ti eyan bafe she wiwon ofurufu, asiko, ati oun ati wipe ko le je aini imule pelu iriri eyan tabi wiwon(eucledeani geometri, fun apere, a o le so wipe ko nimule mo pelu oye imogbonwa tori idasile oye yii fi ogbon kun imule eukladean geometri ninu idasile awon ohun ti a fi man won)

Ni itako,pelu aijiyan pelu imogbonwa, o ri wipe ipo logiki ati protofisiki je oye ti o nimule tan ti o shi ni ilosiwaju pelu sciencii adayeba.[^1]

[^1]: Ninu eleyii gangan Paul Lorenzen, *Methodisches Denken* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968); idem, *Normative Logic and Ethics* (Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969),

::::> Geometry,chronometry ati hylometry(rationali mechanics) je oye to she Pataki ti oshe wiwon ofurufu, asiko ati ohun to seesee. Won nilo lati ni idasile niwaju fisiki ni oye sciencii igbalode; pelu awon ona agbara, le bere. Nigbanaa,ma fe pea won ona meta yii ni oruko konaa: protofisiki. Oro otito protofisiki je awon oro ti oni imule lori logiki, arithmetiki ati itusi wewe, itumo ati oun ti oye to je ki wiwon sheeshee. (p. 60)

:::: Ewo eleyii pelu Peter Janich, *Die Protophysik der Zeit* (Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969); Friedrich Kambartel, *Erfahrung und Struktur* [Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968]).

Iri sciencii adayeba ati itesiwaju re ti wa ni abe itako ninu iwe jiji Thomas Kuhns,iriri iyipada sciencii. [2] ni itusiwewe, episodi aarun ninu itan sciencii adayeba, Kuhn therini she ifagagbaga pelu iri ona itesiwaju scienciile je ilosiwaju diedie losi inu otito lona topo.idanwo ati yiyo oye to so imule renu lona idanwo, pelu gbogboiran ti o n bo, kan mo ju tawon to wani le lo. Dipo, gegebi Kuhn, o je ona ti o wa ni akopo, ti o si wa teleologikali. Iriri iyato tabi iriri ipinle ti di adayeba ti iwulo aye tele ati omiran bi orthodoxii ti o kin shee titilayi, pelu iriri gbogbo ti kole lo aisan, ainifimule, iriri, ati iriri to yato lai si imule laarin awon mejeeji. Sisun iriri o ni riru pelu iriri sugbon won pada sodo esin. Iriri ojo tipe ku bi awon scientist won she kulo, awon titun shi gba aye won gegebi iran tuntun she wa pelu awon scientisti tuntun, kikoran pelu iba ibaraeni soro, dagba soke, pelu gbogbo iran mosi ninu ogbon pelu gbigba ofin tuntun ati fifi oye titi eyin sile she fifiasile iriri iran to ti koja lo.

[^2]: Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970; also Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave, eds., *Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970).

She ishe kuhnu, nigbana, fi wiwo itunmo imogbonwa ti sciencii adayeba ki a shi seda relativisimu? Nigbaa ti kuhnu ronu bayii, ati awon omiran, kakaki Paul Feyerabend, ti randicalizi oye kuhnu si “methodological anarchism” pelu igbe ekun”gbogbo nkanlo” [^3]. A le she iyemeji wipe kosikankan ninu Kuhn fiyerabend tabi elomiran loti she aluyo ninu yiyi gbogbo eyan lokan pada nita towa ivory ti academia lati gba ona relativistiki ti sciencii adayeba. Isin bi titele, gbogbo eniyan ti gba iriri imogbonwa, osi ni mule.

[^3]: Wo Paul Feyerabend, *Against Method* (London: New Left Books, 1975); idem, *Science in a Free Society* (London: New Left Books, 1978); idem, *Wissenschaftals Kunst* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1984).

Eleyii ko sope otito kekere kan o si ninu oun ti kuhnu ati feyerabendi so. Oje otito, ki asimo, isonu oye le shele ninu sciencii adayeba, eleyii ti o si da lati mo, ko kin shee inu kiko awon okowe ti a ti gbagbe. Oje otito wipe ibi bi agbara, iyi, imuwa, animosti, ati ore o ni je ailo ti awon eniyan ba bere sini mo idayeba.(tani,fun apere, ti setan lati fi oye ti o ti fi gbogbo ojo re shee igbekale re nitori aye ti n ri nkan bi ohun ose ri?), nitototo, gegebi economisti, eyan le losi waju ati gba wipe sciencii le waseyin. Liana kan ti lilo capitali, titele pelu igbe aye ti o dara to, ainiyi oja, ati pinpin ishe, osi ti man shele ninu itan eniyan, yo si fesi si ikere ogbon eniyan nipa aye.

Pelu gbogbo eleyii ni siso, oun ti imogbonwa n so ni ipa lori. Fun oun kan, relativisimu kuhnu ari feyerabendi o le tayo sinu logiki ati protofisiki. Ti eyan bafe ni imuwa fun ifiyesi ti o ni itunmo, tabi wiwon towu koje, “ounkoun” o le lo. Awon ona wonyii, ti o wa ni oju Kuhnu ati Feyerabendi niwulo fun sciencii adayeba(ko sikin shee awon iriri ti a o legba ti o ni agbara yiyo, pelu ibora lowo). Sibe sibe,ti o ba ti di mimo, ti o si ti di yiye fun ishe imuwa fun ifiyesi,ika,didasile oun wiwon, wiwon, gbogbo ti o si je ki sciencii adayeba sheeshee, je awon isee to niwulo, odi mimo wipe iriri sciencii adayeba gbodo diriri fun agbaye, odo eniyan, won si gbodo niwulo gege bi won shi shee de ibi ti an wiyi.[^4]

[^4]: See on this also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “On Praxeology and the Praxeological Foundation of Epistemology and Ethics,” in Jeffrey Herbener, ed., *The Meaning of Ludwig von Mises* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991).

The relativistic impression of the development of the empirical natural sciences that Kuhn and Feyerabend try to convey can be traced to the fact that they both misconceive of scientific theories as mere systems of verbal propositions and systematically ignore their foundation in the reality of action. Only if one regards theories as being completely detached from action does any single theory not only become immunizable, but any two rival theories whose respective terms cannot be reduced to and defined in terms of each other must then appear completely incommensurable so as to exclude any rational choice between them. However, this affects neither the refutability of any one theory, nor the commensurability of rival paradigms, on the entirely different level of applying them in the reality of action, of using them as instruments for the attainment of a practical purpose. On the level of mere words, paradigms may be irrefutable and incommensurable, but in practice they never can be. In fact, one could not even state that any single paradigm was irrefutable or any two paradigms were incommensurable and in what respect, unless one presupposed a common categorical framework that could serve as the basis for such an assessment or comparison. It is this *practical* refutability and commensurability of the paradigms of the empirical natural sciences that explains the possibility of technological progress.

In systematically ignoring the fact that theories and theoretically interpreted observations are those of an actor, built and made in order to act successfully, Kuhn and Feyerabend have deprived themselves of the very criterion against which all knowledge concerning nature is continually tested and commensurated: the criterion of successfully reaching a set goal by applying knowledge in a given situation, or of failing to do so. Without the criterion of instrumental success, relativism would be inescapable. Yet in each of our actions visà-vis nature, we confirm the claim of rationalism that one can identify a range of applications for some theoretical knowledge and test it for its success within this range, and hence, that competing theories must be considered commensurable as regards such ranges of application and success. No situation is conceivable in which it would be rational to give up an intellectual tool which had once proven successful in a range of applications if no better tool were available. Yet if a superior tool were available, for example, a theory or paradigm that allowed one to reach a goal that could not be reached equally successfully by applying another, incompatible theory, it would be irrational for an actor not to adopt it. To be sure, such irrational behavior is empirically possible. However, whoever chose it would have to pay a price for doing so. He would deprive himself of the ability to achieve goals that he otherwise could accomplish, and isolated from all social contexts which might offer other, socio-psychological reasons not to adopt it, alone vis-à-vis nature, no one capable of distinguishing between successful and unsuccessful action would ever want to pay such a price. It is this which explains the unacceptability of a relativist view of the natural sciences and the possibility of the actually observable continuous—if at times for socio-psychological reasons somewhat erratic—progress in man’s mastery of nature, which Kuhn and Feyerabend would declare nonexistent, although all the while it seems to be staring them in the face.[^5]

[^5]: See also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1989): esp. 190–92; Wolfgang Stegmüller, *Hauptströmungen der Gegenartsphilosophie* (Stuttgart: Kröner, 1975), vol. 2, chap. 5, esp. pp. 523ff.

The situation is very different if one turns from the natural to the social sciences. Here the claims of rationalism seem to find far less support, and relativism has gained widespread public acceptance.[^6]

[^6]: See Martin Hollis and Steven Lukes, eds., *Rationality and Relativism* (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1982).

Foremost among the indicators cited in support of relativism is the observation that there is nothing in the development of the social sciences resembling the progress which has been achieved in the natural sciences. While our predictive powers and instrumental control over nature have dramatically increased since the times of Plato and Aristotle, the development of the empirical social sciences has been characterized by a standstill. In spite of the availability of all sorts of technical gadgets, such as high-speed computers, it appears that we are in no better position today to predict social events or to planfully bring about social change than were Plato or Aristotle in their days. (One might note that even if the validity of this observation is admitted, the relativistic conclusion to which it allegedly leads does not directly follow. It only follows if it is presupposed that the criteria for progress in the social sciences are indeed identical to those in the natural sciences. Proponents of social relativism take this for granted, yet it is by no means obvious why this should be so. On the contrary, in the natural sciences the object of knowledge [nature] and the subject of this knowledge [an actor] are different separate entities. In the social sciences, on the other hand, the objects of knowledge and research are themselves knowers and researchers. In light of this categorical difference, it would seem anything but clear why the methodology appropriate for the natural and the social sciences could possibly be one and the same. In fact, it is entirely unsurprising that when it comes to predicting predictors, or instrumentally controlling instrumental controllers, there *cannot* be any systematic progress of the kind observed in the natural sciences! [^7])

[^7]: See Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung. Untersuchungen zur Grundlegung von Soziologie und Ökonomie* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1983), esp. pp. 30–32; on methodological dualism see also Ludwig von Mises, *Human Action: A Treatise on Economics* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966), p. 18; idem, *Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985), pp. 1–2, 38–41; further, K.O. Apel, *Die Erklären: Verstehen Kontroverse in transzendental-pragmatischer Sicht* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1979).

Moreover, proponents of relativism usually point out, apparently there is no analogue in the social sciences to the role played by logic and protophysics as the a prioristic foundations of the empirical natural sciences. The rationalist claim, associated in particular with the “natural law” tradition, that such an analogue is provided by economics and ethics,[^8] has either been forgotten and disappeared from public consciousness or is dismissed out of hand: Economics, it is held, is an empirical science very much like physics, with the objective of producing predictive knowledge, but unlike physics it fails to deliver the promised goods. As regards the observation that prosperous as well as poor societies exist, which would seem to make room for economic explanations after all—though not for explanations of the kind offered by physics—the proponents of social relativism contend that such differences have no *economic* reasons but are due to different degrees of *technological* knowledge. Rich societies are rich because of their advanced state of technology; poverty is due to a lack of natural-scientific know-how. Two objections to this view appear obvious: (1) The description of the facts is false. Do not the underdeveloped societies send their future scientists and engineers in large numbers to the universities of the advanced countries, and do not these poor societies then have access to the *same* knowledge upon their return as the rich ones? (2) More important still, technological know-how can only have a material impact if it is utilized. However, in order to do this, there must be savings and investment. It is not the availability of technical or scientific knowledge that imposes limits on a society’s prosperity; rather, it is the amount of savings and investment that imposes limits on the exploitation of actually available knowledge and on scientific progress, insofar as research activities, too, must be supported by saved-up funds. Hence, contrary to relativistic views, economics seems to have something to do with prosperity and poverty after all! [^9]

[^8]: See Mises, *Theory and History*, pp. 44ff.

[^9]: See Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), p. 749.

Nor, it is claimed, does ethics offer support for anything but relativism, for does not the fact of continuous and, so it seems, ineradicable differences of opinion in the field of contemporary politics prove the case of ethical relativism conclusively? Does not social anthropology, the study of societies such as the Fidshi islanders, or the natives of New Guinea, for instance, add still more evidence in support of relativistic conclusions? There are institutions such as cannibalism or slavery which a relativist might be hard pressed to defend. However, according to ethical relativists, regarding these practices as counter-evidence is the result of a misconception. The problem with these institutions is not that they invalidate relativism but that societies adopting them are still under the spell of social rationalism. That is, they still falsely believe in an absolutely founded ethic. Ethical relativism, its proponents claim, rules out intolerant practices such as these and implies a pluralism of values. (But is it not obvious that this doctrine is entirely fallacious? Without an absolute, a priori foundation, a value pluralism is itself just another unfounded ideology, and there is no compelling reason to adopt it over any other one. Only if a priori valid reasons could be given for adopting pluralism could it claim to safeguard tolerance and could cannibalism or slavery then be ruled out as acceptable social practices.[^10])

[^10]: See Henry Veatch, *Rational Man: A Modern Interpretation of Aristotelian Ethics* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1962), esp. pp. 37–46; Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism,” pp. 84–85.
