### Lati owo idogoati owo ifowopao si Isuna idajo owo: Idagbasoke ti awin

Awon Ile ifowopamo se awon ise-sise meji ti o ya, ti o je okan ninu eyi ti a ti kàa be. [^20] Ni apa kan, won sin bi awon idaduro awon ile ise, sise awọon ise abo ati awon ise amukuro. Won gba awon owo asansile (oja) ati eto si owo (awon ile isowo receipt; aropo owo ) fun awon oludari won, atunse ni ile ati lori ibere. Fun gbogbo eto si owo ti won fi owo sile ti won gba iye owo to poju owo gidi ni owo, setan fun irapada (ile-ifowopamo ile-owo idamewa ogorun). Ko si owo ti o san lori awon asansile. Dipo, awon oludari n san owo si ile ifowopamo fun sise iseduro ati awon ise imukuro. Labe awon ipo ti o ti wole si ile-ifowopamo laise idiyele-owo ifowopamo, eyi ti o je wiwole ti ile ifowopamo ati orisun ti o le seese, o duro lati je owo sisan; ati awon ere-tabi dipo, awon anfani pada-mina ni ifowopamo maa n bakannaa ni eyikeyi miiran, ile-ise ti kii se ile ikowo pamo.

Ni apa keji, akoko ti o ya soto kuro ninu awon ile-ise isowo, awon bebe tun n se awon alakoso laarin awon olutoju ati awon oludoko –bi awon bebe iseduro. Ninu ise yii ti won pese akoko ati te sinu awon akoko-siwe pelu awon apamo. Owo ifowopamo pamo si ile-ifowopamo fun akoko –kukuru tabi akoko to gun –paaro fun pasipaaro fun oranyan adehun ti iseduro fun iyooda iwaju pelu die ninu awon afikun anfani pada. Lati oju ti awon olutoju, won se pasipaaro owo bayi fun ileri ti owo iwaju: awon ife-pada pada je ere won fun sise ise ti idaduro. Lehin bayi o ti gba nini igba die pelu awon ifowopamo lati awon apamo, ile ifowo pamo naa tun se owo kanna fun awon oludokoowo (pelu funrare) ni pasipaaro fun iseduro ti awon isoju ti isiparo owo iwaju ati anfani. Iyato laarin awon anfani ti a san si awon apamo ati ti o gba agbara si awon onigbese-o duro fun iye owo fun isowo laarin awon olutoju ati awon oludokoowo ati pe o je owo-owo ifowo pamo. Bi fun ifowopamo ifowopamo ati asansile owo, labe awon ipo ifigagbaga ni awon idiyele ti isowo-isowo tun maa n je owo ti o kere julo, ati awon ere lati owo ifowopamo tun se deede lati je kanna bii awon ti o le se mina ni ibomiiran.

Beni ile-ifowopamo  tabi kowo owo-ifowopamo bi o se han nibi paapaa ilosoke ninu ipese owo tabi owo-ori ti ko ni owo tabi ipile oro. Fun gbogbo iwe ifunni ti a gbejade titun ni iye owo ti o ti gba kuro (nikan ni awon ayipada owo, kii se idiyele re), ati ninu iseduro ifowopamo owo kanna ni yiyo awon owo pada nigbagbogbo. Gbogbo awon pasipaaro-laarin awon oludari ati iseduro ile-ise bakannaa laarin awon apamo, ile ifowo-isowo ati awon oludokoowo-ni o ni anfani pupo.

Ni idakeji, ifowopame ile-owo ida-owo kan je isamuba ti o ni idaniloju laarin awon ohun idogo ati ise ifowopamo. O tumo si ilosoke ninu ipese owo, ati pe o nyorisi atunpin owo-ori ti owo-ori ni adehun ti ile-ifowopamo ati pelu awon aise-aje ti o wa ni irisi isowo owo-isowo.

Iwaju awon ise ifowopamo mejeeji wa si imole ninu otito pe labe awon ifowopamo ile-owo ida, boya awon oludari ni a sanwo anfani (dipo ki o ni lati san owo oya), ati / tabi awon olutoju ni a fun ni eto lati yokuro ni kiakia (dipo ki o to duro pelu ibere won fun irapada titi ojo ti o wa ni ojo iwaju). Ni imo-ero, o seese ti ifowo ile ifowo pamo si iru awon ise bee waye nipase otito pe awon ti o ni awon ohun isansile etan (eto si owo ti a se atunse lori eletan, lesekese, ni par) maa se * ko * lo otun won ni akoko kanna, bii gbogbo won sunmo ifowo pamo pelu ibere fun irapada ni akoko kanna. Bakannaa, apo ifowopamo yoo maa mu iye awon eto (owo to dara) ni afikun ti awon iyooda ojoojumo ti o ye. O di bayi seese fun ile ifowo pamo lati gba awon eto ti "pipadanu" wonyi fun awon alawo, nitorina o n gba owo ifowopamo naa pada (eyi ti ile-ifowo naa le fi fun awon oluse re ni apakan fun awon isowo owo ifowopamo).

Awon onigbowo ti awon ifowopamo ile-owo ida-owo ni igbagbogbo nperare pe iwa yii ti idaduro awon isiro ti o kere ju ogorun-un lo ni o duro nikan fun owo alaimo "isowo-owo," ati pe won se itumo lati so pe ko nikan ile-ifowopamo, sugbon awon oludari (gbigba awon anfani) ati awon olutoju (gbigba lesekese awon eto kuro) yore lati asa naa. Ni otito, awon ile-ifowopamo ile-owo ida-san ni lati ni awon ibaje meji ti o ni ibaje ati pe o je ohun miiran sugbon alailegbe ati gbogbo anfani. Ni akoko, o ye ki o se akiyesi pe ohunkohun ti o kere ju ogorun owo-ifowopamo agbegbe ni ohun ti okan le pe idiwo ti ofin, nitori pe ni lilo awon owo isinmi re fun fifunni gbese, ile-ifowopamo n fi awon gbigbe fun igba die fun won lowo si alawo kan, lakoko awon oludasile, eto ni bi won ti wa ni lati se atunse lesekese dele, se idaduro awon nini won lori owo kanna. Sibesibe, ko see se pe fun igbimo akoko * ati * oluyawo ni eto si isakoso iyasoto lori awon ohun elo kanna. Awon eniyan meji * ko le je * onisowo iyasoto ti okan ati ohun kanna ni akoko kanna. Bakannaa eyikeyi ile ifowo pamo ti n se bibeko ti –ni awon ipinnu lori awon etan ti o poju awon eto gidi –gbodo ni a ka bi o se inunibini. Awon adehun  re * ko le * se. Lati ibere, ile-ifowopamo gbodo wa ni bi isowo –bi a ti fi han pe o ko le se, lodi si iseduro ara re, duro pelu isakoso banki ti o seese.

Keji, ni yiya awon eto ti o po si awon onigbowo, ile ifowo naa n mu ki awon ipese owo naa po sii, laibikita awon oluyawo gba awon eto wonyi ni owo to dara tabi ni ti awon ohun idogo lori edinwo (sayewo awon iroyin). Ti koni naa ba gba owo gidi, lehinna iye owo ti o ye ni sisan ti po sii lai yiyo deede iye ti awon isowo owo lati san; ati pe ti o ba gba iru iwe ayewo kan, lehinna iye owo ti po si lai mu iye ti o ni iye owo ti owo otito kuro ninu sisan. Ni boya idiyele, yoo wa die sii ni owo bayi ju saaju lo, ti o nmu idinku ninu agbara rira ti owo (afikun), ati, ni ona re, si atunse  ti owo ti owo oya gidi ni owo ti ile-ifowopamo ati awon onibara oluwo ati ni laibikita fun awon ile-ise ti kii-ilu ati gbogbo awon onibara ile ifowo pamo miiran. Ile ifowo pamo gba afikun owo-ori anfani nigba ti ko se afikun ilowosi eyikeyi si awon oro gidi ti awon ilu ti kii se ipinle (bi yoo je oran ti o ba je pe iyipada ifarada je abajade ti inawo ti o dinku, pe, awon ifowopamo); ati awon alagbawo gba gidi, awon ohun-ini ti ko ni owo pelu awon owo won, nitorina idinku awon oro gidi ti awon iyoku ti gbogbo eniyan nipase iye kanna.

Moreover, insofar as the bank does not simply spend the excess reserves on its own consumption but instead loans them out against interest charges, invariably a business cycle is set in motion.[^21] The quantity of credit offered is larger than before. As a consequence, the price of credit—the interest charged for loans—will fall below what it otherwise would have been. At a lower price, more credit is taken. Since money cannot breed more money, in order to be able to earn an interest return and a pure profit on top of it, the borrowers will have to convert their borrowed funds into investments. That is, they will have to purchase or rent factors of production—land, labor, and possibly capital goods (produced factors of production)—capable of producing a future output of goods whose value (price) exceeds that of the input. Accordingly with an expanded volume of credit, more presently available resources will be bound up in the production of *future* goods (instead of being used for present consumption) than otherwise would have been; and in order to complete all investment projects now under way, more time will be needed than that required to complete only those that would have been begun without the credit expansion. All the future goods which would have been created without the expansion plus those that are newly added on account of the credit expansion must be produced.

However, in distinct contrast to the situation in which the interest rate falls due to a fall in the rate of time preference (the degree to which present goods are preferred over future goods), and hence where the public has in fact saved more so as to make a larger fund of present goods available to investors in exchange for their promise of a return of future goods, no such change in time preference and savings has taken place in the case under consideration. The public has *not* saved more, and accordingly, the additional amount of credit granted by the bank does not represent *commodity credit* (credit covered by nonmoney goods which the public has abstained from consuming), but it is *fiduciary* or *circulation credit* (credit that has been literally created out of thin air—without any corresponding sacrifice, in the form of nonconsumed nonmoney goods, on the part of the creditor).[^22] Had the additional credit been commodity credit, an expanded volume of investment activities would have been warranted. There would have been a sufficiently large supply of present goods that could be devoted to the production of future goods such that all—the old as well as the newly begun—investment projects could be successfully completed and a higher level of future consumption attained. If the credit expansion is due to the granting of circulation credit, however, the ensuing volume of investment must actually prove overambitious. Misled by a lower interest rate, investors act *as if* savings had increased. They withdraw more of the presently available resources for investment projects, to be converted into future capital goods, than is warranted in light of actual savings. Consequently, capital goods prices will increase initially relative to consumer goods prices, but once the public’s underlying time preference rate begins to reassert itself, a systematic shortage of consumer goods will arise. Accordingly, the interest rate will adjust upward, and it is now consumer goods prices which rise relative to capital goods prices, requiring the liquidation of part of the investment as unsustainable malinvestment. The earlier boom will turn bust, reducing the future standard of living below the level that otherwise could have been reached.

Among recent proponents of fractional reserve banking the cases of Lawrence White and George Selgin[^23] deserve a few critical comments, if for no other reason than that both are critics of Friedmanite monetarism who hark back, instead, to the tradition of Austrian and in particular Misesian monetary theory.[^24] Their monetary ideal is a universal commodity money such as an international gold standard and, based on this, a system of competitive banking which, they claim, would—and should be permitted to do so for reasons of economic efficiency as well as justice—engage in fractional reserve banking and the granting of fiduciary credit.

As to the question of justice, White and Selgin offer but one argument destined to show the allegedly nonfraudulent character of fractional reserves: that outlawing such a practice would involve a violation of the principle of freedom of contract by preventing “banks and their customers from making whatever sorts of contractual arrangements are mutually agreeable.”[^25] Yet this is surely a silly argument. First off, as a matter of historical fact fractional reserve banks never informed their depositors that some or all of their deposits would actually be loaned out and hence could not possibly be ready for redemption at any time. (Even if the bank were to pay interest on deposit accounts, and hence it *should* have been clear that the bank *must* loan out deposits, this does not imply that any of the depositors actually understand this fact. Indeed, it is safe to say that few if any do, even among those who are not economic illiterates.) Nor did fractional reserve banks inform their borrowers that some or all of the credit granted to them had been created out of thin air and was subject to being recalled at any time. How, then, can their practice be called anything but fraud and embezzlement!

Second, and more decisive, to believe that fractional reserve banking should be regarded as falling under and protected by the principle of freedom of contract involves a complete misunderstanding of the very meaning of this principle. Freedom of contract does not imply that *every* mutually advantageous contract should be permitted. Clearly, if A and B contractually agree to rob C, this would not be in accordance with the principle. Freedom of contract means instead that A and B should be allowed to make any contract whatsoever *regarding their own properties*, yet fractional reserve banking involves the making of contracts regarding the property of third parties. Whenever the bank loans its “excess” reserves to a borrower, such a bilateral contract affects the property of third parties in a threefold way. First, by thereby increasing the money supply, the purchasing power of all other money owners is reduced; second, all depositors are harmed because the likelihood of their successfully recovering their own possessions is lowered; and third, all other borrowers—borrowers of commodity credit—are harmed because the injection of fiduciary credit impairs the safety of the entire credit structure and increases the risk of a business failure for every investor of commodity credit.

In order to overcome these objections to the claim that fractional reserve banking accords with the principle of freedom of contract, White and Selgin then, as their last line of defense, withdraw to the position that banks may attach an “option clause” to their notes, informing depositors that the bank may at any time suspend or defer redemption, and letting borrowers know that their loans may be instantly recalled.[^26] While such a practice would indeed dispose of the charge of fraud, it is subject to another fundamental criticism, for such notes would no longer be *money* but a peculiar form of *lottery tickets*.[^27] It is the function of money to serve as the most easily resalable and most widely acceptable good, so as to prepare its owner for instant purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at not yet known future dates; hence, whatever may serve as money so as to be instantly resalable at any future point in time, it must be something that bestows an *absolute* and *unconditional* property right on its owner. In sharp contrast, the owner of a note to which an option clause is attached does *not* possess an unconditional property title. Rather, similar to the holder of a “fractional reserve parking ticket” (where more tickets are sold than there are parking places on hand, and lots are allocated according to a “first-come-firstserved” rule), he is merely entitled to participate in the drawing of certain prizes, consisting of ownership or time-rental services to specified goods according to specified rules. But as drawing rights—and not unconditional ownership titles—they only possess *temporally conditional* value until the time of the drawing, and they become worthless as soon as the prizes have been allocated to the ticket holders; thus, they would be uniquely *un*suited to serve as a medium of exchange.

As regards the second contention: that fractional reserve banking is economically efficient, it is noteworthy to point out that White, although he is undoubtedly familiar with the Austrian-Misesian claim that *any* injection of fiduciary credit must result in a boom-bust cycle, nowhere even mentions the problem of business cycles. Only Selgin addresses the problem. In his attempt to show that fractional reserve banking does not cause business cycles, however, Selgin then falls headlong into the fundamental Keynesian error of confusing the demand for money (determined by the utility of money) and savings (determined by time preference).[^28]

According to Selgin, “to hold inside money is to engage in voluntary saving”; and accordingly “an increase in the demand for money warrants an increase in bank loans and investments” because

> [w]henever a bank expands its liabilities in the process of making new loans and investments, it is the holders of the liabilities who are the ultimate lenders of credit, and what they lend are the real resources they could acquire if, instead of holding money, they spent it.[^29]

Based on this view of the holding of money as representing saving and an increased demand for money as being the same thing as increased saving, then, Selgin goes on to criticize Mises’s claim that *any* issuance of fiduciary media, in lowering the interest rate below its “natural” level, must cause a business cycle as “confused.” “No ill consequences result from the issue of fiduciary media in response to a greater demand for balances of inside money.”[^30]

Yet the confusion is all Selgin’s. First off, it is false to say that the holding of money (the act of not spending it), is equivalent to saving. One might as well say—and this would be equally wrong—that the not-spending of money is equivalent to *not* saving. In fact, saving is not-consuming, and the demand for money has nothing to do with saving or not-saving. The demand for money is the unwillingness to buy or rent nonmoney goods, and these include consumer goods (present goods) *and* capital goods (future goods). Not-spending money is to purchase, *neither* consumer goods *nor* investment goods. Contrary to Selgin, then, matters are as follows: Individuals may employ their monetary assets in one of three ways. They can spend them on consumer goods; they can spend them on investment; or they can keep them in the form of cash. There are no other alternatives. While a person must at all times make decisions regarding three margins at once, invariably the outcome is determined by two distinct and praxeologically unrelated factors. The consumption/investment proportion (the decision of how much of one’s money to spend on consumption and how much on investment) is determined by a person’s time preference (the degree to which he prefers present consumption over future consumption). On the other hand, the source of his demand for cash is the utility attached to money (the personal satisfaction derived from money in allowing him immediate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates).

Accordingly, if the demand for money increases while the social stock of money is given, this additional demand can only be satisfied by bidding down the money prices of nonmoney goods. The purchasing power of money will increase, the *real* value of individual cash balances will be raised, and at a higher purchasing power per unit money, the demand for and the supply of money will once again be equilibrated. The relative price of money versus nonmoney will have changed. But unless time preference is assumed to have changed at the same time, *real* consumption and *real* investment will remain the same as before: the additional money demand is satisfied by reducing nominal consumption *and* investment spending in accordance with the same pre-existing consumption/investment proportion, driving the money prices of both consumer as well as producer goods down and leaving real consumption and investment at precisely their old levels. If time preference is assumed to change concomitantly with an increased demand for money, however, then everything is possible. Indeed, if spending were reduced exclusively on investment goods, an increased demand for money could even go hand in hand with an increase in the rate of interest and reduced saving and investment. However, this, or the equally possible opposite outcome, would not be due to a change in the demand for money but exclusively to a change (a rise, or a fall) in the time preference schedule. In any case, if the banking system were to follow Selgin’s advice and accommodate an increased demand for cash by issuing fiduciary credit, the social rate of time preference would be falsified, excessive investment would result, and a boom-bust cycle would be set in motion, rendering the practice of fractional reserve banking fraudulent *as well as* economically inefficient.

White’s and Selgin’s proposal of a commodity money based system of competitive fractional reserve banking—of partial fiat money—is neither just (and hence the term “free banking” is inappropriate), nor does it produce economic stability. It is no fundamental improvement as compared to the monetarist reality of monopolistically issued pure fiat currencies. Indeed, in one respect Friedman’s pure fiat money proposal contains a more realistic and correct analysis than White’s and Selgin’s because Friedman recognizes “what used to be called ‘the inherent instability’ of fractional reserve banking,” and he understands that this inherent instability of competitive fractional reserve banking will sooner or later collapse in a “liquidity crisis” and then lead to his favored regime—a governmentally provided pure fiat currency—anyway.[^31]

Only a system of universal commodity money (gold), competitive banks, *and* 100-percent-reserve deposit banking with a strict functional separation of loan and deposit banking constitutes a just monetary system that can assure economic stability and present a genuine answer to the current monetarist fiasco.

[^20]: On the following see in particular Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Synder, 1983); idem, *The Case for a 100 Percent Gold Dollar* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1991); Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*; idem, *Human Action*; also Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); S. Koch, *Fractional Reserve Banking: A Practical Critique* (Master’s thesis, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 1992).

[^21]: On the theory of the business cycle see in particular Ludwig von Mises, *Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik* (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928); idem, *Human Action*, chap. 20; F.A. Hayek, *Prices and Production* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1931); Murray N. Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975).

[^22]: On the fundamental distinction between commodity credit and circulation credit, see Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 263ff.

[^23]: See Lawrence White, *Competition and Currency* (New York: New York University Press, 1989); George Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking* (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988).

[^24]: For a critique of White and Selgin as misinterpreting the fundamental thrust of Mises’s theory of money and banking see Joseph Salerno, “The Concept of Coordination in Austrian Macroeconomics,” in *Austrian Economics: Perspectives on the Past and Prospects for the Future*, Richard Ebeling, ed. (Hillsdale, Mich.: Hillsdale College Press, 1991); idem, “Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 (1993): 113–46.

[^25]: White, *Competition and Currency*, p. 156, also pp. 55–56; George Selgin, “Short-Changed in Chile: The Truth about the Free-Banking Episode,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter/Spring, 1990): 5.

[^26]: White, *Currency and Competition*, p. 157; Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 137.

[^27]: See Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” p. 30.

[^28]: For a critique of this error see Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 39–43; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Theory of Employment, Money Interest, and the Capitalist Process: The Misesian Case Against Keynes,” in *The Economics and Ethics of Private Property*, Hoppe, ed. (Boston: Kluwer, 1993), pp. 119–20, 137–38.

[^29]: Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 55.

[^30]: Ibid., pp. 61–62.

[^31]: See Friedman and Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?”
