### 

Lehin ti atunko yii ti ogbologbo, ati paapaa ofin ti Osise Austrian ti oojo, owo, anfani, ati ilana igbimo capitalist, Mo yoo yipada si Keynes ati imoran "tuntun" re. Saaju ki o to sehin ti alaye wa ti atijo to yoo je rorun lati se afihan "titun" ti Gbogbogbo ti Ise, Ise-inu, ati Owo *gegebi idibaje pataki ati Iyika ti Keynesian gege bi okan ninu awon etan ogbon ti o kehin. [^23]

#### Gbigba ise

Awon Keynes pataki wa jade pelu isaro eke ti ise. Ni idakeji si wiwo ti ilosiwaju, o so pe o je ise alaise ti ko ni isiro lori oja ofe; ati, siwaju sii, pe oja-oja kan le de odo iwontun-ise idurosinsin pelu ise alaise alailowe lowolowo. Ati pe ni wi pe iru ikuna iru oja be lati seese, o se igbiyanju lati siiye ogbon ti o se pataki fun iseduro awon iseduro awon oja nipase awon agbara-isowo ti okeere.

Niwon ibi oja ofe ti wa ni asoye nipa awon ile-ile tabi ti o se ohun elo ti ara eni ati ifarada ti gbogbo awon ibara e nisoro laarin awon olohun-ini ti ara eni, o ye ki o wa ni kedere pe ohun ti Awon Keynes nperare lati fi han je eyiti o je deede fun egbe ti o ni egbe.

Awon Keynes pataki bere pelu oro igbasile ti imoran ti o ni imoran "pe ko si iru nkan bii alainise alaise ti ko ni idaniloju ni oye ti o muna." [^24] Ni otito, ko ni iru nkan bee. Ilana ti o ni imoran ti se pe pe alainise alailowaya je ailogbon-praxeologically soro bi igba ti oja ofe kan wa ninu ise. Ti alainie alaise-ni-ni-ni-ara, nitooto eyikeyi iye ti o, le wa tele niwaju ile-ise afikun oja-tita, awon ofin ti o kere julo, ati bebe lo, ko ni issiro rara.

Lehin ti kuku yii, Keynes wa lati fun alaye re nipa alainise alaise:

> Awon okunrin je alainise ti ara eni ti o ba je pe, ni isele ti ilosiwaju kekere ni iye owo awon oya-oja [tumo si., awon oja onibara] nipa owo oya owo, mejeeji ipese apapo ise ti o fe lati sise fun owo- lowolowo ati apapo ibere fun o ni oya naa yoo je tobi ju iwon agbara ti o wa tele lo.[^25]

Ti o tumo si ede geesi, ohun ti Keynes n so ni ona asoju re ti o je pe awon okunrin je alainise ti ko ni isiro bi ilosoke ninu awon owo ti o ni ibatan si awon osuwon yorisi si ise die sii [^26] Sibesibe iru iyipada be ni iye owo ti o je ibatan subu ninu awon osuwon owo sisan; ati awon isubu ni owo oya gidi le see mu lori oja ti ko ni owo nipase awon oya osan ni eyikeyi akoko ti won ba fe, nìkan nipa gbigba awon iye owo iyooda ti o kere ju pelu awon oja iye owo ti o wa ni ibi ti won wa. Ti awon alagbase ba pinnu lati ma se eyi, ko si nkankan ti o se alabapin ni gbogbo eyi. Fifun iforukosile won fun ise, nwon yan lati pese iye ti ise naa ti a ti pese. Tabi iyato ti yiyi gegebi ise alainise alaise-ti-ni-ayipada se yi pada die, ti o ba je ni akoko miiran ni akoko pelu awon osuwon owo osuwon kekere ti iye ise yoo je sii. Nipa iyato, irufe abajade yii le see se ni bi awon alagbase ti n safihan bayi ti po si imoran ti osuwon  ti a fun ni ibamu pelu awon ibere ifisowo ti won (bibeko ti, ti ko ba si iru iyipada be, ise yoo dinku dipo gbigbe). Otito, sibesibe, pe okan le yi oka pada lati ikankan kan ni akoko si ekeji ti o niise pe ipinnu ti o yan tele je ijerisi, bi Keynes yoo se ni. Dajudaju, okan le salaye awon ofin okan ni ona kan ti o feran, ati ninu asa ti Orwellian kan ti o le yan paapaa lati pe atinuwa ti a fi funni ni iranlowo ati fifun-ni-iranlowo. Sibe nipase ona yii ohunkohun labe orun le je "fihan," lakoko ti o daju ko si ohunkan ti ohunkohun ti o han. Awon ona Keynes ti se afihan awon isise ti alainise alailowe je eri oro isokuso oro ti o fi oju re sile ni otito ko si iru nkan bii ise ti ko ni ise, ni orisirisi ori oro yii, le wa tele lori oja ti ko ni owo.

Bi enipe eyi ko to, Keynes loke o nipase siso pe alainise alailowaya ko see se ni ile ti ailopin ti kii se. Nitooto, o se akiyesi isaaju re * Sise Owo lori Owo * nipa siso pe, "Emi ko mo pe, ni awon ipo miiran, eto naa le je ni iwontun-die pelu kere ju oojo kikun lo." [^27] Sugbon alatunba ti wa ni * asoye * bi ipo kan ninu eyi ti awon ayipada ninu awon iye, imo-ero, ati awon ohun elo ko waye laise ibi ti gbogbo awon sise ti wa ni atunse patapata si titobi data ti o gbehin; ati nibiti gbogbo awon ifosiwewe ti sise lehinna, pelu isise, ni o ni oojo ti o ti seese (fi fun awon alaye aiyipada yi) ati pe o je ise ti o ni ilosiwaju ati ailopin ni ilana igbasile deede. Nitorina, gegebi H. Hazlitt ti so, idari ti iwontun-ise alainise nipase Keynes, ninu re * Gbogbogbo Igbimo *, je bi ariyanjiyan ti isiro triangular - idaamu ni awon ofin.[^28]

#### Owo

Lehin ti o ti safo imoran ni itoju re ti ise ati alainise, Keynes, ninu ijiroro re ti owo, lehinna saforo ero aje nipa gbigbe siwaju si eto pe owo ati awon ayipada owo (le) ni ipa aifowoyi lori owo oya ise, ati anfani.

Fun otito pe "owo" yoo han ninu akole ti * Gbogbogbo Agbegbe, * Ero ti o daju ti Keynes je owo ti o ni iyaniloju ati ti ko ni idagbasoke. Bakannaa, dajudaju, le je ewa. Ni oran ti Keynes, o nfunni ni anfani lati se afihan dipo awon isoro asise akoko re.Fun Awon Keynes, "* pataki ti owo se pataki lati safihan ona asopo laarin bayi ati ojo iwaju. * [^29]" Owo ni awon eya ti o se pataki julo ni, ju gbogbo lo, ero ti o rorun fun sisopo bayi ati ojo iwaju . "[^30] Eyi je eke lati odo otito pe ninu ile ti iwonba ti kii se lailai, ko si owo yoo wa tele, [^31] sibe labe awon ipo isodotun yoo tun je bayi ati ojo iwaju, ati pe awon mejeji yoo si tun sopo. Dipo ki o sise bi ona asopo si ojo iwaju, owo yoo je ona isowo; ipa kan ti o je eyiti a ko so po si ailopin ti ojo iwaju. [^32] Ise, eyiti o bere ni bayi ati pe o ni ifojusi die ninu awon afojusun iwaju, die tabi kere si jina ni akoko lati ori ibere, je ona asopo gidi laarin bayi ati ojo iwaju. Ati pe o je akoko asiko gege bi eka ti ise gbogbo ti o fun ni ona asopo laarin bayi ati ojo iwaju re apere kan pato. Owo, ni idakeji anfani, ko tun se alaye ti bayi si ojo iwaju ju awon isele aje miiran lo, gegebi awon oja ti kii se deede. Iye won ti o wa loni, tun se awon ifojusona nipa ojo iwaju, ko si siwaju sii ko si kere ju be lo ni owo.

Lati isaaju asise akoko nipa iseda ti owo, gbogbo awon asise miiran ti nsan laifowoyi. Ti a se apejuwe bi asopo ti o ni iyooda laarin bayi ati ojo iwaju, idiwo fun owo (ipese re ni a fun), eyi ti Keynes, ni ila pelu ifarahan gbogbogbo re ti siwejuwe awon isoye-isiro-oro bi awon emi-okan, awon oro "ipinnu iye owo" tabi "iyasoto si "[^33] ni a so pe o je ise ti o niise pelu osuwon iwulo (ati ni idakeji). [^34]" Awon anfani, "  Keynes ko," je esan ti ko-dimu, "[^35]" ere fun pipin pelu oloomi, "[^36] eyi ti o mu ki ipinnu oloomi se iyipada si aisedede lati gbewo ni awon ohun-ini anfani. Eyi je eke di kedere ni kete ti enikan ba beere ibeere naa "Kini, lehinna, nipa awon owo?" Iye iye oti, fun apeere, ti a le ra fun apapo owo kan je kedere ko kere si esan fun pipin pelu oloomi ju eyi ti o fe lo, eyi ti yoo se ife fun owo lehinna aisedede lati ra oti bi o ti je aisedede lati nawo. [^37] Ti a gbekali ni awon gbolohun gbolohun, wiwa fun owo ni aisedede lati ra tabi ya owo-ori , pelu awon ohun-ini ti o ni anfani (ile, ise, ati / tabi awon oja-ilu, tabi awon oja iwaju) * ati * awon ohun-ini ti kii se anfani (onibara tabi awon oja ti o wa). Lati ranti eyi ni lati se akiyesi pe ibere fun owo ko ni nkan lati se pelu idoko tabi pelu agbara; tabi kii se ohunkohun ti o se pelu ipin awon idoko-owo-gbigbe, tabi itankale laarin awon ifunni ati awon ise-sise (iye owo ti o ga julo tabi awon oja iwaju ti o wa ni isale tabi awon oja ti o wa). Alekun tabi dinku ni wiwa fun owo, awon ohun miiran bakanna, kekere tabi gbin ipele apapo ti awon owo, sugbon isagbe gidi ati idoko-owo, bakannaa ipinnu idoko-owo idoko-sise ko ni aibuku; ati iru be je oran, oojo ati owo oya-owo ti ko ni iyipada bakanna. Awon eletan fun owo pinnu awon inawo / owo iwontunwonsi idi. Awon idoko-owo-gbigbe, agbara Keynes, je ohun ti o yato patapata ati ohun ti ko ni ibatan. O ti wa ni sise nipase ipinnu nipase akoko-ayo.[^38]

The same conclusion is reached if changes in the supply of money (liquidity preference being given) are considered. Keynes claims that an increase in the supply of money, other things being equal, can have a positive effect on employment. He writes, “so long as there is unemployment, employment will change in the same proportion as the quantity of money.”[^39] Yet this is not only a highly curious pronouncement because it *assumes* the existence of unemployed resources instead of *explaining* why such a thing should possibly occur—for, obviously, a resource can be unemployed only because it is either not recognized as scarce at all and thus has no value whatsoever, or because its owner voluntarily prices it out of the market and its unemployment then is no problem that would call for a solution.[^40]

Even if one were to waive this criticism, the statement would still be fallacious. For if other things were indeed equal, then the additional supply of money would simply lead to increased overall prices and simultaneous and proportional increased wage rates, and nothing would change at all. If, contrary to this, employment should increase, this is only possible if wage rates do not rise along with, and to the same extent as, other prices. However, other things then can no longer be said to be equal, because real wage rates would be lowered, and employment can only rise while real wages fall if the relative evaluation of employment versus self-employment (i.e., unemployment) is assumed to have changed. Yet if this is assumed, no increase in the money supply would have been required. The same result (increased employment) could also have been brought about by laborers accepting lower nominal wage rates.

#### Interest

With logic and economic theory thrown out of the window, in his discussion of the interest phenomenon Keynes abandons reason and common sense entirely.

According to Keynes, since money has a systematic impact on employment, income, and interest, interest, in turn—quite consistently, for that matter—must be conceived of as a purely monetary phenomenon.[^41] I need not explain the elementary fallacy of this view. Suffice it to say here again that money would disappear in equilibrium, but interest would not, which demonstrates that interest must be considered a real, not a monetary phenomenon.

Moreover, Keynes, in talking about “functional relationships” and “mutual determination” of variables instead of causal, unidirectional relations, becomes entangled in inescapable contradictions as regards his theory of interest.[^42] As has been explained above, on the one hand Keynes thinks of liquidity preference (and the supply of money) as *determining* the interest rate, such that an increased demand for money, for instance, would raise the interest rate (and an increased supply of money would lower it) and that this then will reduce investment “whilst a decline in the rate of interest may be expected, *ceteris paribus*, to increase the volume of investment.”[^43] On the other hand, characterizing the interest rate as “the reward for parting with liquidity,” he contends that the demand for money is *determined* by the interest rate, such that a fall in the interest rate, for instance, would increase one’s demand for cash (and also, one should add, one’s propensity to consume) and hence lead to *reduced* investment. Obviously, however, a lower interest rate can hardly both increase and decrease investment at the same time. Something must be wrong here.

Keynes, however, combines falsehood and contradiction into one of the most fantastic conspiracy theories ever heard of.

Since interest, according to Keynes, is a purely monetary phenomenon, it is only natural to assume that it can be manipulated at will through monetary policy (provided, of course, one is not restricted in this by the existence of a 100-percent-reserve commodity money standard such as the gold standard).[^44] “There is,” writes Keynes, “no special virtue in the pre-existing rate of interest.”[^45] In fact, if the supply of money is sufficiently increased, the interest rate supposedly can be brought down to zero. Keynes recognizes that this would imply a superabundance of capital goods, and one would think that this realization should have given him cause to reconsider. Not so! On the contrary, in all seriousness he tells us

> that a properly run community equipped with modern technical resources, of which the population is not increasing rapidly, ought to be able to bring down the marginal efficiency of capital in equilibrium approximately to zero within a single generation.[^46]

It is “comparatively easy to make capital goods so abundant that the marginal efficiency of capital is zero (and) this may be the most sensible way of gradually getting rid of many of the objectional features of capitalism.”[^47] “There are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of capital.”[^48] Rather, it is “possible for communal saving through the agency of the State to be maintained at a level where it ceases to be scarce.”[^49]

Don’t worry that this would imply that no maintenance or replacement of capital would be needed any longer (for, if this were the case, capital goods would still be scarce and hence command a price), and capital goods instead would have to be “free goods” in the same sense in which air is usually “free.” Don’t worry that if capital goods were no longer scarce, then consumer goods could no longer be scarce either (for, if they were, the means employed to produce them would have to be scarce, too). And don’t worry that in this Garden of Eden, which Keynes promises to establish within one generation (why so long?!), there would no longer be any use for money. For, as he informs us, “I am myself impressed by the great social advantages of increasing the stock of capital until it ceases to be scarce.”[^50] Who would dare disagree with this! [^51]

Yet more is to come. Because, as Keynes sees it, there are some obstacles on the path toward paradise. For one thing, the gold standard stands in the way, because it makes the expansion of credit impossible (or difficult at least, in that a credit expansion would lead to an outflow of gold and a subsequent economic contraction). Hence Keynes’s repeated polemics against this institution.[^52] Furthermore, there is the just explained problem of his own making: that a lower interest rate supposedly increases and decreases investment simultaneously. And it is to get out of this logical mess that Keynes comes up with a conspiracy theory: For, while the interest rate must be reduced to zero so as to eliminate scarcity, as we were just told, the lower the interest rate the lower also the reward for parting with liquidity. The lower the interest rate, that is to say, the lower the incentive for capitalists to invest, because their profits will be reduced accordingly. Thus, they will try to undermine, and conspire against, any attempt to resurrect the Garden of Eden.

Driven by “animal spirits,”[^53] “gambling instincts,”[^54] and “addicted to the money-making passion,”[^55] they will conspire so “that capital has to be kept scarce enough.”[^56] “The acuteness and peculiarity of our contemporary problem arises, therefore,” writes Keynes,

> out of the possibility that the average rate of interest which will allow a reasonable average level of employment [and of social income] is one so unacceptable to wealth owners that it cannot be readily established merely by manipulating the quantity of money.[^57]

In fact,

> the most stable, and least easily shifted, element in our contemporary economy has been hitherto, and may prove to be in the future, the minimum rate of interest acceptable to the generality of wealth owners.[^58]

Fortunately, we are informed, there is a way out of this predicament; through “the euthanasia of the rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital.”[^59] And surely they deserve such a fate. For “the business world” is ruled by an “uncontrollable and disobedient psychology,”[^60] and private investment markets are

> under the influence of purchasers largely ignorant of what they are buying and of speculators who are more concerned with forecasting the next shift of market sentiment than with a reasonable estimate of the future yield of capital assets.[^61]

As a matter of fact, don’t we all know that “there is no clear evidence from experience that the investment policy which is socially advantageous coincides with that which is most profitable;”[^62] indeed, that the decisions of private investors depend largely on “the nerves and hysteria and even the digestions and reactions to the weather,”[^63] rather than on rational calculation?! Thus, concludes Keynes, “the duty of ordering the current volume of investment cannot safely be left in private hands.”[^64] Instead, to turn the present misery into a land of milk and honey, “a somewhat comprehensive socialization of investment will prove the only means.”[^65]

> The State, which is in a position to calculate the marginal efficiency of capital-goods on long views and on the basis of the general social advantage [must take] an ever greater responsibility for directly organizing investment.[^66]

I trust that none of this requires further comment. It is too obvious that these are the outpourings of someone who deserves to be called anything, except an economist.

[^23]: For pro-Keynesian literature see in particular Seymour P. Harris, ed., *The New Economics* (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1947); Alvin Hansen, *A Guide to Keynes* (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1953); for anti-Keynesian literature see in particular Henry Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics”* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1959); idem, ed., *The Critics of Keynesian Economics* (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1983).

[^24]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 21; also pp. 6, 15.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 15\. Keynes at this point promises an alternative definition to be given on p. 26; revealingly, no such definition appears there or anywhere else in the book!

[^26]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 30.

[^27]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 242–43; also p. 28.

[^28]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 52.

[^29]: Keynes, *General Theory*, p. 293.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 294.

[^31]: Mises explains:

> Let us assume that there is only gold money and only one central bank. With the successive progress toward the state of an evenly rotating economy all individuals and firms restrict step by step their holding of cash and the quantities of gold thus released flow into nonmonetary—industrial—employment. When the equilibrium of the evenly rotating economy is finally reached, there are no more cash holdings; no more gold is used for monetary purposes. The individuals and firms own claims against the central bank, the maturity of each part of which precisely corresponds to the amount they will need on the respective dates for the settlement of their obligations. The central bank does not need any reserves as the total sum of the daily payments of its customers exactly equals the total sum of withdrawals. All transactions can in fact be effected through transfer in the bank’s books without any recourse to cash. Thus the “money” of this system is not a medium of exchange; it is not money at all; it is merely a *numéraire*, an ethereal and undetermined unit of accounting of that vague and indefinable character which the fancy of some economists and the errors of many laymen mistakenly have attributed to money. (*Human Action*, p. 249)

[^32]: Keynes recognizes that money also has something to do with uncertainty. The fundamental mistake in his theory of money pointed out here, however, surfaces again when he relates money not to uncertainty as such, but, more specifically, to uncertainty of interest rates. “The necessary condition” [for the existence of money] he writes, “is the existence of uncertainty as to the future rate of interest” (*General Theory*, p. 168; also p. 169). See also the following discussion.

[^33]: Ibid., p. 174.

[^34]: On the absurd implications of the assumption of functional—rather than causal—relations, see the discussion below.

[^35]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 174.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 167.

[^37]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” pp. 188f.

[^38]: See also Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 40–41; Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 521–23.

[^39]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 296.

[^40]: See also W.H. Hutt, *The Theory of Idle Resources* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1977).

[^41]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 173; see also his laudatory remarks on mercantilist economics, and in particular, Silvio Gesell, as precursors of this view on pp. 341, 355.

[^42]: See on this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 687–89.

[^43]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 173.

[^44]: See also below.

[^45]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 328.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 220.

[^47]: Ibid., p. 221.

[^48]: lbid., p. 376.

[^49]: Ibid., p. 376.

[^50]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 325.

[^51]: See also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the* “*New Economics,*” pp. 231–35\. What about the seemingly obvious objection, that the expansion of monetary credit through which Keynes wants to bring about the reduction of the interest rate to zero is nothing but an expansion of paper, and that the problem of scarcity is a matter of “real” goods, which can only be overcome through “genuine savings”? To this he has the following funny answer in *The General Theory*:

> The notion that the creation of credit by the banking system allows investment to take place to which “no genuine saving” corresponds, i.e., the idea that saving and investment … can differ from one another, is to be explained, I think, by an optical illusion. (p. 81)
> 
> [T]he savings which result from this decision are just as genuine as any other savings. No one can be compelled to own the additional money corresponding to the new bank-credit unless he deliberately prefers to hold more money rather than some other form of wealth. (p. 83)
> 
> The new money is not “forced” on anyone. (p. 328)

As Henry Hazlitt remarks,

> [o]n the same reasoning we can create any amount of new “savings” we wish overnight, simply by printing that amount of new paper money, because *somebody* will necessarily hold that new paper money! (*The Failure of the “New Economics,”* p. 227)

[^52]: See Keynes, *The General Theory,* pp. 129ff., 336ff., 348f. On Keynes’s role in the actual destruction of the gold standard see Henry Hazlitt, *From Bretton Woods to World Inflation* (Chicago: Regnery, 1984).

[^53]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 161.

[^54]: Ibid., p. 157.

[^55]: Ibid., p. 374.

[^56]: Ibid., p. 217.

[^57]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 308–09.

[^58]: Ibid., p. 309, and he adds, in a footnote, “The nineteenth-century saying, quoted by Bagehot, that ‘John Bull’ can stand many things, but he cannot stand 2 per cent.” On Keynes’s conspiracy theory see also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* pp. 3, 16–18.

[^59]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 376, also p. 221.

[^60]: Ibid., p. 317.

[^61]: Ibid., p. 316.

[^62]: Ibid., p. 157.

[^63]: Ibid., p. 162.

[^64]: Ibid., p. 320.

[^65]: Ibid., p. 378.

[^66]: Ibid., p. 164.
