## Idajọ ti ṣiṣe iṣowo

Iṣoro pataki ti iṣowo oselu jẹ bi o ṣe le ṣajọpọ awujọ ki o le ṣe iṣeduro igbelaruge ọrọ. Iṣoro ti iṣoro ti ọgbọn imoye oselu jẹ bi o ṣe le ṣe iṣeto awujọ lati le ṣe ipilẹṣẹ awujo..

Ibeere akọkọ beere awọn nkan ti ṣiṣe daradara: Awọn ọna wo ni o yẹ fun ṣiṣe iyasọtọ kan pato, ni idi eyi, ọrọ?

Ibeere keji ṣubu ni ita ita ti awọn ti a npe ni imọ-rere rere. O beere bii boya tabi kii ṣe iṣowo aje iṣowo ti a le fun ni a le da lare bi idiwọn, ati boya boya tabi kii ṣe, lẹhinna, awọn ọna ti aje iṣeduro iṣowo le ṣe iṣiro bi ọna ti o dara fun awọn opin.

Ninu awọn wọnyi Mo fi ipilẹṣẹ to she pataki fun iwe-akọwe naa pe awọn ọna ti a ṣe iṣeduro nipasẹ iṣowo aje jẹ otitọ ọna fun ọna pipe.

Mo bẹrẹ nipasẹ apejuwe awọn ọna ti a ṣe iṣeduro nipasẹ iṣowo oloselu ati ṣe alaye idiyele awọn idi ti idibajẹ ọrọ ti o waye nipa gbigbe wọn ni o tobi ju eyiti a ṣe nipa gbigbe ọna miiran. Niwon iṣẹ-ṣiṣe akọkọ mi ni lati ṣe afihan idajọ awọn ọna wọnyi ti n ṣapọn ọrọ, apejuwe mi ati alaye ti ṣiṣe iṣowo yoo jẹ kukuru.

Iṣowo oloselu bẹrẹ pẹlu imisi iyọọda. O jẹ nitoripe a ko gbe ninu Ọgbà Edeni ti a ni idaamu nipa iṣoro ti ṣiṣe iṣowo. Gegebi iṣowo oselu, ọna ti o dara julọ lati fagile, ti ko ba ṣe aṣeyọri, aini jẹ ipilẹ ohun-ini ti ara ẹni. Awọn ofin ti o jẹ ilana ile-iṣẹ yii ni a ti mọ ni otitọ fun apakan julọ nipasẹ John Locke. Wọn jẹ bi wọnyi:

Gbogbo eniyan ni ara ti ara rẹ ati gbogbo awọn ọja ti o kere julọ ti o fi fun pẹlu iranlọwọ ti ara rẹ ṣaaju ki ẹnikẹni ṣe. Ijẹ ẹtọ yii n tumọ si ẹtọ lati lo awọn ọja ti o kere julọ ṣugbọn ọkan rii pe o yẹ niwọn igba ti o ba ṣe bẹẹ ọkan ko ni ipa lodi si ohun ini miiran, ie, niwọn igba ti ọkan ko ba yipada ni aifọwọyi ti ara ẹni tabi ohun elo miiran tabi lai laisi igbasilẹ rẹ. Ni pato, ni kete ti o dara ti a ti kọkọ silẹ tabi ti o ni ile-iṣẹ nipasẹ didọpọ iṣẹ kan pẹlu rẹ (Locke's phrase) lẹhinna nini nini ninu rẹ nikan ni a le gba nipasẹ iṣipopada gbigbe ti akọle ohun-ini lati išaaju si eni ti o tẹle.

Idi ti ile-iṣẹ yii ṣe nlọ si iṣelọpọ titobi ti o pọju ni ọrọ. Eyikeyi iyatọ kuro ninu ipo ofin yi tumọ si, nipasẹ itumọ, atunṣilẹ atunkọ awọn akọle ohun-ini (ati ni bayi ti owo-ọya) kuro lọdọ awọn oniṣẹ-olumulo ati awọn alagbaṣe ti awọn ọja ati si awọn alaṣẹ-olumulo ati awọn alaiṣe ti kii ṣe onibara. Gegebi abajade, iyatọ eyikeyi yoo tumọ si pe iyasọtọ atilẹba ti awọn ohun elo ti o jẹ pe aiyan ko ṣeeṣe, yoo wa kere si awọn ọja titun, diẹ si itọju awọn ọja to wa tẹlẹ, ati pe ko ni adehun ti iṣowo ati iṣowo. Eyi tumọ si ijẹrisi kekere ti igbesi aye ni awọn ofin ati awọn iṣẹ ti o ṣe paṣowo. Pẹlupẹlu, ipese ti nikan ni olumulo akọkọ (kii ṣe ti o kẹhin) kan ti o dara ti o gba agbara ni idaniloju pe awọn igbesẹ ọja yoo jẹ bi o ti ṣee ṣe ni gbogbo igba. Pẹlupẹlu, ipese ti o ni ẹtọ ti ara nikan ti ohun-ini (kii ṣe awọn ohun-ini ohun ini) ni awọn ẹri ti o ni idaabobo fun gbogbo eniyan pe gbogbo oluwa yoo ṣe awọn iṣoro ti o lagbara julọ ti o ṣe pataki, ie, awọn igbiyanju lati ṣe igbelaruge awọn ayipada rere ni awọn ohun-ini ati lati dena tabi ṣe atunṣe eyikeyi iyipada ayidayida ninu awọn iye ohun ini (bi wọn ṣe le ja si awọn iṣe ti eniyan miiran nipa ohun ini rẹ). Bayi, eyikeyi iyapa lati awọn ofin wọnyi tun tumọ si awọn ipele ti o dinku fun awọn igbadun ọja ti o ni iye ni gbogbo igba.

Ni bayi si iṣẹ mi akọkọ ti ṣe afihan pe iṣeto ti ohun-ini ti ara ẹni gẹgẹ bi o ti ṣe deede jẹ otitọ-ni otitọ, pe nikan ni ile-iṣẹ yii jẹ pe ati pe eyikeyi iyipada kuro lọdọ rẹ kii ṣe iṣọn-ọrọ ti iṣuna nikan ṣugbọn alailẹgbẹ.

Ni akọkọ, sibẹsibẹ, jẹ ki mi ṣalaye iru iṣiro ti o ni ibamu laarin iṣoro ti o koju aje aje ati ti o kọju si imoye oloselu-ibajọpọ pe awọn ọlọgbọn oloselu ni aibikita ti o niyemeji ti awọn ọrọ-aje ko dagbasoke nikan lati ṣe afẹfẹ ni awọn ipolongo alailopin. Imọ iyasọtọ ti ailera kii ṣe nikan ni ibẹrẹ fun aje aje; o jẹ ibẹrẹ ti imoye oloselu bakanna. O han ni, bi wọn ba jẹ ohun ti o pọju ti awọn ọja, ko si isoro aje kan ti yoo waye. Pẹlú ọpọlọpọ awọn ọja ti o jẹ pe lilo mi bayi fun wọn ko dinku ipese ti o wa ni iwaju tabi ipese lọwọlọwọ tabi awọn ọja iwaju fun eyikeyi miiran, awọn iṣoro ti iṣedede ti otitọ tabi aṣiṣe, o kan tabi alaiṣotọ yoo ko farahan boya lẹhin igbati o ko ni ariyanjiyan lilo awọn iru nkan bẹẹ le ṣee dide. Nikan ni ẹru ti awọn ọja ni o kere julọ ni awọn ọrọ-iṣowo ati awọn ilana ti o nilo. Ni ọna kanna, gẹgẹ bi idahun si iṣoro ti iṣowo oselu gbọdọ wa ni agbekalẹ ni awọn ofin ti o ni idaniloju awọn lilo ti awọn oluşewadi s awọn nkan ti o niyele, imoye oselu tun gbọdọ dahun ni awọn ẹtọ ti ẹtọ awọn ohun-ini. Lati le yago fun awọn ariyanjiyan ti ko ni idibajẹ, o gbọdọ ṣe agbekalẹ awọn ofin ti o fi ẹtọ awọn ẹtọ ti iṣakoso iyasoto lori awọn ọja ti ko to. (Akiyesi pe ani ninu Ọgbà Edeni, ara eniyan, aaye ti ara naa wa, ati akoko yoo ṣiwọn ati pe iye ti iṣowo aje ati imọran yoo tun ni iṣẹ, sibẹsibẹ opin, lati mu.)

imudaniloju gangan ti iwe-ipilẹ ti o jade kuro ninu awọn ọna ti o lewu julọ ti o fi ẹtọ awọn ẹtọ iyasoto si awọn eniyan, nikan awọn ofin ti a ṣalaye ti awọn ohun-ini ti ara ẹni tẹlẹ ni o daju. Emi yoo mu ariyanjiyan mi ni ọna atẹsẹ-ẹsẹ ni akọkọ.

Ni akọkọ, lakoko ti o jẹ ailewu jẹ ipo ti o yẹ fun ifarahan ti iṣoro ti ọgbọn ọgbọn, o ko to. Fun o han ni, a le ni awọn ija nipa lilo awọn ohun elo ti ko niye pẹlu, jẹ ki a sọ, erin tabi efon kan, sibe a ko ni ro pe o ṣee ṣe lati yanju awọn ija wọnyi nipa gbigbero awọn ilana ohun-ini. Ni iru awọn iru bẹẹ, idena awọn ihamọ ti o ṣee ṣe jẹ imọ-ẹrọ nikan, kii ṣe iṣe awujọ, iṣoro. Fun o lati di iṣoro aṣa, o tun jẹ dandan pe awọn olukopa ti o fi ori gbarawọn jẹ agbara, ni opo, ti ariyanjiyan. Ni pato, eyi jẹ eyiti o jẹ airotẹlẹ bẹ nitoripe a tun n ṣiṣẹ ni ariyanjiyan nibi. Ti o kọ pe imoye oloselu ti o tumọ si ariyanjiyan jẹ eyiti o lodi si, bi iṣiro naa yoo jẹ ariyanjiyan. Nikan pẹlu ariyanjiyan ni idaniloju ifẹsi ati otitọ wa jade ati pe ko ni ọna nikan ni imọran otitọ ni awọn ọrọ iṣe ti ofin ṣugbọn ti otitọ ni apapọ. Nikan laarin ariyanjiyan ni awọn ẹtọ otitọ ti eyikeyi ṣe, ati pe o wa ni abajade ariyanjiyan pe awọn ipinnu otitọ wa ni ipinnu. Idibaṣe yii, o wa ni jade, jẹ otitọ ti ko ni otitọ: ọkan ko le jiyan pe ọkan ko le jiyan, ati pe ọkan ko le ni idaniloju mọ ohun ti o tumọ si pe ki o sọ otitọ kan laisi pe o nperare ni wi pe o kere julọ idibajẹ ti idaniloju yii lati jẹ otitọ. Igbesẹ akọkọ mi ni abala awọn atẹle yii, lẹhinna, ni a npe ni "ipilẹṣẹ ariyanjiyan" nipasẹ awọn ọlọgbọn bi Jurgen Habermas ati K.O. Apeli. [^ 1]

[^1]: K.O. Apel, “Das Apriori der Kommunikationsgemeinschaft und die Grundlagen der Ethik,” in idem, *Transformation der Philosophie* (Frankfurt/M., 1973), vol. II; Jürgen Habermas, *Moralbewusstsein und kommunikatives Handeln* (Frankfurt/M. 1983).

In the same way as it is undeniably true that ethics requires argumentation, it is also undeniably true that any argument requires an arguing person. Arguing does not consist of free-floating propositions. It is an activity. If aside from whatever is said in its course, however, argumentation is also a practical affair and if argumentation is the presupposition of truth-claiming and possibly true propositions, then it follows that intersubjectively meaningful norms must exist—namely those which make an action argumentation—which must have a special cognitive status in that they are the practical preconditions of truth. Once more, this is true a priori, so that anyone, such as an empiricist-positivist-emotivist who denied the possibility of a rational ethics and who declared the acceptance or rejection of norms an arbitrary affair would invariably get caught in a practical contradiction. For contrary to what he would say, he would in fact have to presuppose the norms which underlie any argumentation whatsoever as valid simply in order to say anything at all.

With this step I lose, once and for all, the company of philosophers like Habermas and Apel.[^2] Yet, as will become clear immediately, it is directly implied in the previous step. That Habermas and Apel are unable to take this step is, I submit, due to the fact that they, too, suffer, as do many other philosophers, from a complete ignorance of economics, and a corresponding blindness towards the fact of scarcity. The step is simply this: To recognize that argumentation is a form of action and does not consist of free-floating sounds implies the recognition of the fact that all argumentation requires that a person have exclusive control over the scarce resource of his body. As long as there is argumentation, there is mutual recognition of each other’s property right in his own body. It is this recognition of each other’s exclusive control over one’s own body, presupposed by all argumentation, which explains the unique feature of verbal communication that while one may disagree about what has been said, it is still possible to agree at least on the fact that there is such disagreement. Again, such a property right in one’s own body must be said to be justified a priori, for anyone who would try to justify any norm whatsoever would already have to presuppose the exclusive right to control over his body as a valid norm simply in order to say “I propose such and such.” Further, any person who tried to dispute the property right in his body would become caught up in a practical contradiction since arguing in this way would already imply acceptance of the very norm which he was disputing. He would not even open his mouth if he were right.

[^2]: Apel and Habermas are essentially silent on the all-decisive question of what ethical prescription actually follows from the recognition of the “a priori of argumentation.” However, there are remarks indicating that they both seem to believe some sort of participatory social democracy is implied in this a priori. The following explains why nothing could be further from the truth.

The final argument extends the idea of private property as justified, and justified a priori, from the very prototype of a scarce good (a person’s body) to other goods. It consists of two parts. I first demonstrate that argumentation, and argumentative justification of anything, presupposes not only the right to exclusively control one’s body but the right to control other scarce goods as well, for if no one had the right to control anything except his own body, then we would all cease to exist and the problem of justifying norms—as well as all other human problems—simply would not exist. We do not live on air alone; hence, simply by virtue of the fact of being alive, property rights to other things must be presupposed to be valid, too. No one who is alive could argue otherwise.

The second part of the argument demonstrates that only the Lockean idea of establishing property claims through homesteading is a just principle of property acquisition. The proof employs a simple *argumentum a contrario*: If a person did not acquire the right of exclusive control over other, nature-given goods by his own work, that is, if other people, who had not previously used such goods, had the right to dispute the homesteader’s ownership claim, then this would only be possible if one would acquire property titles not through labor, i.e., by establishing some objective link between a particular person and a particular scarce resource, but simply by means of verbal declaration. This solution—apart from the obvious fact that it would not even qualify as a solution in a purely technical sense in that it would not provide a basis for deciding between rivaling declarative claims—is incompatible with the already justified ownership of a person over his body. For if one could indeed appropriate property by decree, this would imply that it would also be possible for one to simply declare another person’s body to be one’s own. However, as we have seen, to say that property is acquired not through homesteading action but through declaration involves a practical contradiction: nobody can say and declare anything, unless his right to use his body is already assumed to be valid simply because of the very fact that regardless of what he says, it is he, and nobody else, who has homesteaded it as his instrument of saying anything.

With this, my a priori justification of the institution of private property is essentially complete. Only two supplementary arguments may be needed in order to point out why and where all other ethical proposals (let me call them socialist) are argumentatively indefensible.

According to the private property ethics, scarce resources that are under the exclusive control of their owners are defined in physical terms, and, *mutatis mutandis*, aggression, is defined as an invasion of the physical integrity of another person’s property. As indicated, the economic effect of this provision is that of maximizing value productive efforts. A popular deviation from this is the idea of defining aggression as an invasion of the value or psychic integrity of another person’s property instead. This idea underlies John Rawls’s “difference principle” that all inequalities have to be expected to be to everyone’s advantage regardless of how such inequalities have come about,[^3] Robert Nozick’s claim that a “dominant protection agency” has the right to outlaw competitors regardless of their actual actions, and his related claim that “nonproductive exchanges” in which one party would be better off if the other one did not exist may be outlawed, again regardless of whether or not such exchange involved any physical aggression.[^4]

[^3]: John Rawls, *A Theory of Justice* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971), p. 60, pp. 75f., 83.

[^4]: Robert Nozick, *Anarchy, State, and Utopia* (New York: Basic Books, 1974), pp. 55f., 83–86.

Such proposals are absurd as well as indefensible. While every person can have control over whether or not his actions cause the physical integrity of something to change, control over whether or not one’s actions affect the value of someone’s property to change rests with other people and their evaluations. One would have to interrogate and come to an agreement with the entire world population to make sure that one’s planned actions would not change another person’s evaluations regarding his property. Everyone would be long dead before this could ever be accomplished. Moreover, the idea that property value should be protected is argumentatively indefensible, for even in order to argue, it must be presupposed that actions must be allowed prior to any actual agreement because if they were not, one could not even argue so. Yet if one can, then this is only possible because of objective borders of property, i.e., borders which every person can recognize as such on his own, without having to agree first with anyone else with respect to one’s system of values and evaluations. Rawls and Nozick could not even open their mouths if it were otherwise. The very fact, then, that they do open them proves what they say is wrong.

The second popular deviation, equally absurd and indefensible, is this: Instead of recognizing the vital importance of the prior-later distinction in deciding between conflicting property claims—as the private property ethics does, thereby assuring value productive efforts to be as high as possible at all times—the claim is made, in essence, that priority is irrelevant and that late-comers have rights to ownership just as first-comers do. Again, with his belief in the rights of future generations, just savings rates and such things, Rawls may be cited as an example. However, if late-comers indeed had legitimate ownership claims to things, then literally no one would be allowed to do anything with anything as one would have to have all of the latercomers’ consent prior to ever doing what one wanted to do. Neither we, nor our forefathers, nor our progeny could, do or will survive if one followed this rule. However, in order for any person—past, present, or future—to argue anything it must evidently be possible to survive then and now. Moreover, in order to do just this—and even people behind a Rawlsian “veil of ignorance” would have to be able to survive—property rights cannot be conceived of as being timeless and non-specific regarding the number of people concerned. Rather, they must necessarily be thought of as originating through acting at specific points in time for specific acting individuals. Otherwise, it would be impossible for anyone to first say anything at a definite point in time and for someone else to be able to reply. Simply saying, then, that the prior-later distinction can be ignored implies a contradiction, as one’s being able to say so must presuppose one’s existence as an independent decision-making unit at a given point in time.

Hence, I conclude that any socialist ethic is a complete failure. Only the institution of private property, which also assures the greatest possible production of wealth, can be argumentatively justified, because it is the very precondition of argumentation.

