### Ile iwe Austian ti Ekonomiksi ati afojusona eni to n mogbinwa, atunko asa ati ekonomiksi

Wipe ada positivisimu pada ni kiakia gegebi oye to tako ara re o gbawa lowo idi re. sibesibe,nitori iwa awon positisti fun awon to lagbara ni ijoba o si se die ninu didikun gbajumo positivisti. Oun pupo ni a nilo lati segun positivisti ju lati she imule wipe iro ni ero logiki. Ogba wa ni ogbon odun idanwo awujo, iyanju lati fikun awon idi lagbaye ati ninu ilo kookan wipe kosii ofin asa tabi lona economiki,wipe ko si oun to je tabu,ati wipe nkan l;e je shishe. Ogba idurosojukan ilu ti owa ni iwo orun ti o bere ni ipari 60’s ati ibere 70’s; itesiwaju ilu keta leyin decolonisason; ati lilodeedee, ati lati ipare 80’s- ati aadorin odun idanwo- ati ilu didaru awon ilu awujo ti o wa ni ilaorun[^24]. Nita aye yii, ni academia, mo n sope ogba, ifarasin ti kop e pupo ti asa ati ti oye iselu, ati yiyo funrawon ti itupale linguistic, ainitunmo oro osupa yiyo, tabi ikojopo oselu ti a sin soro nipa oye. Ogba yiyosile ekonomiksi sinu boya idaraya ti o nitumpo, ti o jora bakan losi oun ti a ti je oun ti a ti ro pupo seyin(ayafii awon isele kookan, oro ilu[^26] shishe la towo, ni dara ju, onisoro to gbe ipo keji ti o ni olugbo rara, sugbon lati gba eruku ni awon ibi ikawe ti o satileyin taxi ni aye yii) tabi onilo idapada re sibvi shishe ti a tin so asotele, nibi ti fitility ti fihan si gbogbo ti o sin dun wa, ati awon oselu ati awon eyan ijoba ti o pa ina re lati idi “legitima sori ona sciencii”. Ogba defaulti systemu Keynesian, pelu oye ti o sheeshee ti stagflationi ni aarin 70’s, pipa riri nipa monetaristi, leyin asotele topo lati ipari 70’s losi 80’s, ati gbogbo, ailowo agbaye ti ekonomiksi marxisti.[^28]

fun itumo centurie ogun gege bi oye engineering awujo ati imogbonwa, wo Paul Johnson’s magnificent *Modern Times* (New Yorki: Harper and Row, 1983).

[^25]: Wo Veatch, *Rational Man*; idem, *fun Ontology of Morals: A Critique of Contemporary Ethical Theory* (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1971); idem, *Human Rights: Facts or Fancy?* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985).

[^26]: Fun apere, Gary North she abamo wipe

::::> Wo iwe Kankan ninu 1983 ekonomiksi[nobel] olugba, Gerald Debreu, *Theory of Value: An Axiomatic Analysis of Economic Equilibrium*, ti o si je ikejo tite ni 1979, ikawegboye kika ekonomiksi, itoni iriri ninu gbogbo iwe naa wani oju iwe 29, oro “ikeji Red Winter Wheat.” (Gary North, “Why Murray Rothbard ………….gba ohun eye nobeli,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty, Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* [Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988], pp. 89–90)

[^27]: ninu liloseyin sciencii awujo, wo awon iriri ti Stanislav Andreski, *Social Science as Sorcery* (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1972); Charles Sykes, *ProfScam: Professors and the Demise of Higher Education* (Washington, D.C.: Regnery, 1988).

[^28]: See also Murray N. Rothbard, *For a New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 9; idem, “The Hermeneutical Invasion of Philosophy and Economics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1989): 54–55; idem, “Is There Life After Reaganomics,” in Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., ed., *The Free Market Reader* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988), esp. p. 378; idem, “Ronald Reagan; An Autopsy,” *Liberty* II, no. 4 (March 1989).

Positivistimu o ti ku. Sibesibe, lati aarin 70’s, iye igba relativisimu awujo ati engineerin ti gaju lati foju fo tala kama menuba rara diedie, wahala oye tayo, ko ba wa lojiji, pelu positivisimu ton solere nu, pelu awon oun oye miiran, ti osi ti di igba positivisti, ti tayo pada ti o si ni gbiyanju lati di iho ti ti wa. Lilo pelu awon oruko hermeneuticsi, ultra subjectivisimu, ati deconstructionisimu, isipopada akademiki wa bayii ti oshin gbiyanju lati tan imole pada si ise nihilisimu- wipe ko si oun ti o n je otito- ti oshi fi aishasheyori positivisimu han yato si imogbonwa, sugbon si idi wipe ko wa relativistiki to ninu lilo ati gba otito(hyperthetikali)empirikalli dipo ko si ooto rara.[^29]

[^29]: fun wiwo daradara ti nihilisimu tuntun, ewo, “Deconstruction in Philosophy: Has Rorty Made It the Denouement of Contemporary Analytical Philosophy?,” *Review of Metaphysics* 39 (1985); Jonathan Barnes, “A Kind of Integrity,” *London Review of Books* (November 6, 1986); Rothbard, “The Hermeneutical Invasion of Philosophy and Economics”; Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism.”

Sugbon wahala yi ti dapada oye rationalisimu awujo ti o ti fi han asise positivistimu, sugbon o jabo sinu idaru nigba ri aye awon positivisti. Pelu eye nobeli ni 1974 losi…………Rothbard, ti ni iriri isoji. Yiyo fun igba pupo, lati ibi eko oko toriwipe aimo awon to wa lagbara, o si pada si wiwa abe aye aise ile iwe giga, opolo awon eniyan ile aye, ile iwe Austrian ti gbajumo, o si ti dapasi iyipada, pelu lilosoke awon ton tele, pelu atileyin puposi. Ni pato, pelu olori ile iwe Ludwingvon Mises, ti a ri ni aarin 80’s, iyipada yi ti lo kakakiri aye ti Mises-renaissance shi n tayo ni iwo orun europu. Faced with the total collapse of socialism and the exhaustion of all governmental authority and legitimacy, and confronted with the task of the immediate and radical reconstruction of their countries, the advice that empirically meaningless mathematical economics, or econometrics, can give or that can be derived from Keynesianism, Monetarism, Rational Expectationism or, worse still, Hermeneuticism, can only appear to them as ridiculously inappropriate. In their emergency situation, only the Austrian School offers an unambiguous, radical, and constructive answer: Not only do truths exist in the social sciences, but there exist a priori, nonhypothetical truths which no one is capable of undoing. The truth is as simple as fundamental: that private property and private property rights is an indisputably valid, absolute principle of ethics and the basis for continuous “optimal” economic progress; and that in order to arise from the ruins of socialism, nothing will suffice but an uncompromising privatization of each and all property and the return to a contractual society based on the recognition of the absoluteness of private property rights.[^30]

[^30]: For a critical assessment of the revolution in Eastern Europe see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “The Collapse of Socialism and the Future of Eastern Europe”, *Kwasny Economics* II, no. 6 (October 30, 1989); idem, *Desocialization in a United Germany* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1991).

Indeed, the Austrian School represents the most ambitious of all forms of social rationalism with its unyielding contention that nonhypothetical a priori empirical knowledge within the field of the social sciences exists, and that it is ethics and economics (which contain this knowledge) which are analogous to logic and protophysics as the absolutely indispensable foundation of all empirical social research. Furthermore, the Austrian School alone has substantiated this contention by offering a completely developed, consistent, and all-comprehensive *positive* theory of ethics and economics.[^31]

[^31]: See in particular Mises, *Human Action*; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*; idem, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands: Humanities Press, 1982).

Indirectly, the basic claim of Austrianism has already been established. During the above refutation of positivism it was demonstrated that while knowledge and actions cannot be conceived of as caused (i.e., predictable on the basis of time-invariantly operating effect variables), any action, by virtue of trying to bring about some given goal, presupposes a causally structured physical reality. Obviously, this insight itself represents a perfect example of the possibility of nonhypothetical social knowledge: it formulates knowledge about actions which no actor could possibly discover to be false, because any such discovery would actually presuppose its validity. Austrianism in fact merely claims that there is much more implied in our reflectively gained knowledge of what it is to act than this, which no actor can thus possibly falsify.

The Austrian theory sets out from two systematically interrelated axioms, both of which are nonhypothetically true. The first is the “axiom of action”: the proposition that humans act, or more precisely, that I am acting now. It cannot be denied that this proposition is true, since the denial would itself be an action. Nor can anyone intentionally *not* act, because this, too, would be an action. Thus the truth of the axiom literally cannot be undone.[^32]

[^32]: See Mises, *Human Action*, part 1.

The second axiom is the “a priori of argumentation”. What we have done here all along—I in writing this study and the reader in reading it—is engaged in argumentation. If it were not for argumentation there would be no debate about the truth or falsity of social relativism or rationalism and the status of ethics and economics. There would only be silence or meaningless noise. Only with argumentation does the idea of validity and truth emerge. Whether or not something is true, false, or undecidable; whether or not it has been justified; what is required in order to justify it; whether I, someone else, or no one is right—all of this must be decided in the course of argumentation and propositional exchanges. This proposition is a priori true, too, because it cannot be denied without affirming it in the act of denying it. One cannot argue that one cannot argue, and one cannot dispute knowing what it means to raise a validity claim without implicitly claiming at least the negation of this proposition to be true. This is the *a priori of argumentation*,[^33] and both axioms are related as logically necessary interwoven strands of a priori knowledge. On the one hand, actions are more fundamental than argumentation because argumentation is only a subclass of action. On the other hand, to state what has just been stated about action and argumentation and their relationship to each other already requires argumentation, so epistemologically argumentation must be considered to be more fundamental than nonargumentative action.

[^33]: See in particular Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*, vol II.

Ethics, or more specifically, the Austrian private property ethic, is derived from the a priori of argumentation, and it is from its nature as a nonhypothetically true axiom that ethics derives its own status as absolutely true.[^34]

[^34]: See on the following Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chaps. 2, 7.

With the a priori of argumentation established as an axiomatic starting point of epistemology, it follows that anything that must be presupposed in the act of proposition-making cannot be propositionally disputed again. It would be meaningless to ask for a justification of presuppositions which make the production of meaningful propositions possible in the first place. Instead, they must be regarded as ultimately justified by every proposition maker. Any specific propositional content that disputed their validity must be understood as implying a performative or practical contradiction.

Further, in the same way as it is undeniably true that one cannot argue that one cannot argue, and that it must be assumed that everyone engaging in argumentation must know what it means to claim something to be true, it is also true that any argument requires an arguing person, an actor. Arguing never just consists of free-floating propositions but is always an activity, too. Given that truth claims must be raised and decided upon in the course of argumentation, and that argumentation, aside from whatever is said in its course is also a practical affair, it follows that intersubjectively meaningful norms must exist. These norms are precisely those which make an action argumentation, and they have a special cognitive status in that they are the practical preconditions of truth. In fact, neither the empiricalfact/emotive-value dichotomy so dear to the positivists, nor their distinction between empirical and analytical statements, could be claimed to be valid unless the norms underlying argumentation (in the course of which these distinctions are made) were themselves regarded as valid. It is simply impossible to argue otherwise because in doing so one would in fact presuppose their validity.

Now, as a necessarily practical affair, any propositional exchange requires a proposition-maker’s exclusive control (property) over some scarce means. No one could possibly propose anything, and no one could possibly become convinced of any proposition, if one’s right to make exclusive use of one’s physical body were not already presupposed. It is one’s recognition of another’s mutually exclusive control over his body which explains the distinctive characteristic of propositional exchanges: that while one may disagree about what has been said, it is still possible to agree at least on the fact that there is disagreement. It is obvious, too, that such a property right in one’s own body must be said to be justified a priori, for anyone who would try to justify any norm whatsoever must already presuppose an exclusive right of control over his body simply to say, “I propose such and such”. Anyone disputing such a right would become caught up in a practical contradiction, since in arguing so one would already implicitly have accepted the very norm that one was disputing.

Finally, it would be equally impossible to engage in argumentation, if one were not allowed to appropriate in addition to one’s body other scarce means through homesteading, i.e., by putting them to use before someone else does, or if such means were not defined in objective, physical terms.

For if no one had the right to control anything at all, except his own body, then we would all cease to exist and the problem of justifying norms—as well as all other human problems—simply would not exist. The fact that one is alive presupposes the validity of property rights to other things. No one who is alive could argue otherwise.

And if a person did not acquire the right of exclusive control over such goods by homesteading, by establishing some objective link between a particular person and a particular physical resource before anyone else had done so, but instead late-comers were assumed to have ownership claims to things, then literally *no one would be allowed to do anything with anything at any time* unless he had the prior consent of all late-comers. Neither we nor our forefathers nor our progeny could survive or will survive if we were to follow this rule. Yet in order for any person—past, present or future—to argue anything it must evidently be possible to survive. And in order for us to do this, property rights cannot be conceived of as timeless and nonspecific regarding the number of people concerned. Rather, property rights must necessarily originate through action at definite places and times for specific acting individuals. Otherwise, it would be impossible for anyone to say anything at a definite tine and place and for someone else to reply. To assert that the first-user-first-owner rule of private property can be ignored or is unjustified implies a contradiction. One’s assertion of this proposition presupposes one’s existence as a physically independent decision-making unit at a given point in time, and the validity of the homesteading principle as an absolute principle of property acquisition.

Economics, or in Mises’s terminology praxeology, and its status as a nonhypothetical, a priori true social science is derived from the axiom of action.[^35]

[^35]: See on the following Mises, *Human Action*, chap. IV; Rothbard, *Man Economy, and State*, chap. 1; idem, “Praxeology: The Methodology of Austrian Economics”, in Edwin Dolan, ed., *The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science*; also Lionel Robbins, *The Nature and Significance of Economic Science* (New York: New York University Press, 1982).

With every action an actor pursues a goal, and whatever his goal may be, the fact that it is pursued by an actor reveals that he places a relatively higher value on it than on any other goal of action he could conceive of at the start of his action.

In order to achieve this goal an actor must interfere or decide not to interfere (which is also an interference) at an earlier point in time to produce a later result, and this interference implies the use of some scarce means (at least those of the actor’s body, its standing room, and the time used by the interference).

These means must also have value for an actor—a value derived from that of the goal—because the actor must regard their employment as necessary in order to achieve the goal effectively. Further, actions can only be performed sequentially and always involve making a choice, i.e., taking up one course of action which at some given point in time promises the most highly valued result to the actor and excluding at the same time the pursuit of other, less valued goals.

In addition, when acting an actor not only invariably aims to substitute a more for a less satisfactory state of affairs and demonstrates a preference for higher over lower values; he also invariably considers when in the future his goals will be reached and demonstrates a universal preference for earlier over later results. Since every action requires time and man must occasionally consume something, time is always scarce. Hence, present or earlier results are, and invariably must be, valued more highly than future or later ones, and man will only exchange a present value against a future one if he thereby anticipates *increasing* his future well-being.

Furthermore, as a consequence of having to choose and give preference to one goal over another, of not being able to realize all goals simultaneously, and of being constrained by time preference, each and every action implies the incurrence of costs, i.e., the forsaking of the value attached to the most highly valued alternative goal that cannot be realized or whose realization must be postponed because the means necessary to effect it are bound up in the production of another, even more highly valued goal.

Finally, it is implied in our knowledge of what it is to act, that at its starting point every goal of action must be considered worth more to the actor than its cost and capable of yielding a profit, i.e., a result whose value is ranked higher than that of the foregone opportunities. However, every action is also invariably threatened by the possibility of a loss if in retrospect an actor finds that contrary to expectations the result actually achieved has a lower value than the relinquished alternative would have had.

All of these categories which we know to be the very heart of economics—values, means, choice, preference, time preference, cost, profit and loss—are implied in the axiom of action. Like the axiom itself, they incorporate nonhypothetically true knowledge. Any attempt to disprove this knowledge would itself have to be an action, aimed at a goal, requiring means, excluding other courses of action, incurring costs, subjecting the actor to the possibility of achieving or not achieving the desired goal, and thus leading to a profit or a loss.

All true economic propositions, and this is what the Austrian conception of economics is all about, can be deduced by means of formal logic from this incontestably true material knowledge regarding the meaning of action and its categories. More precisely, all true economic theorems consist of: (a) an understanding of the meaning of action; (b) a situation or situational change—assumed to be given or identified as being given—and described in terms of action-categories; and (c) a logical deduction of the consequences—again in terms of such categories—which result for an actor from this situation or situational change. For instance, the law of marginal utility, one of the most basic laws of economics, follows from our indisputable knowledge of the fact that every actor always prefers what satisfies him more over what satisfies him less, plus the assumption that he is faced with an increase in the supply of a good (a scarce means) whose units he regards as of equal serviceability by one additional unit. From this it follows with logical necessity that this additional unit can only be employed as a means for the removal of an uneasiness that is deemed less urgent than the least valuable goal previously satisfied by a unit of such a good.

The combination of ethics as implied in the axiom of argumentation and of economics as implied in that of action yields what might be called Austrian welfare economics.[^36]

[^36]: See also Murray N. Rothbard, *Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series no. 3, 1977); idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed, Andrews and McMeel, 1977); idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation”, *Cato Journal* 1, no. 2 (1981); Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*; idem, “*Man, Economy, and Liberty*: Review Essay”, *Review of Austrian Economics* 4 (1990).

If and insofar as actors choose to act in accordance with the indisputably valid principle of the private property ethic, social welfare—defined in terms of Pareto-optimality—will invariably be optimized: A person’s original appropriation of unowned resources, as demonstrated by this very action, increases his utility or welfare (at least *ex ante*). At the same time, it makes no one worse off because in appropriating them he takes nothing away from others. Obviously, others could have homesteaded these resources, too, if only they had perceived them as scarce, and hence, valuable. However, they did not do so, which demonstrates that they attached no value to them whatsoever, and thus they cannot be said to have lost any utility on account of this act. Proceeding from this basis, any further act of production utilizing homesteaded resources is equally Pareto-optimal on demonstrated preference grounds, provided only that it does not uninvitedly impair the physical integrity of the resources homesteaded or produced with homesteaded means by others. Finally, every voluntary exchange starting from this basis must also be regarded as a Paretooptimal change because it can only take place if both parties expect to benefit from it.

Operating according to the rules just described always, and invariably so, leads to the greatest possible production of wealth, for any deviation from this set of rules implies, by definition, a redistribution of property titles, and hence of income, away from user-producers and contractors of goods onto non-users-producers and noncontractors. Consequently, any such deviation implies that there will be relatively less original appropriation of resources whose scarcity is recognized, there will be less production of new goods, less maintenance of existing goods, and less mutually beneficial contracting and trading. This in turn implies a lower standard of living in terms of exchangeable goods and services. Furthermore, the provision that only the *first* user of a good acquires ownership assures that productive efforts will be as high as possible *at all times*. The provision that only the physical integrity of property (not property values) is protected guarantees that every owner will undertake the greatest possible *value*-productive efforts to promote favorable changes in property values and to prevent or counter any unfavorable changes in property values (as they might result from another person’s actions regarding his property). Thus, any deviation from these rules also implies reduced levels of value productive efforts at all times.

The radical simplicity of this Austrian theory of ethics and economics, indeed the fact that it has been fully elaborated—foremost in Ludwig von Mises’s epochal *Human Action*, and in Murray N. Rothbard’s *Man, Economy, and State* and *The Ethics of Liberty*—to a rigorously consistent as well as architectonically beautiful edifice of ethical and economic thought explains why the social rationalism of the Austrian School could be driven underground during the heyday of positivism but could never be entirely uprooted and eradicated. Its truth is too obvious to be consistently ignored among men of intellectual curiosity and common sense, for is it not natural that every person should own his own body as well as all scarce goods which he puts to use with the help of this body before anyone else does? Is it not obvious that every owner should have the right to employ these goods as he sees fit so long as in so doing he does not uninvitedly change the physical integrity of another’s property? Is it not obvious that once a good has first been homesteaded or produced with homesteaded means, then ownership of it can only be acquired by means of a contractual, voluntary transfer of a property title from a previous to a later owner? And is it not intuitively clear that only if, and insofar as, these rules are in effect, the greatest possible production of social wealth and welfare will ensue?[^37]

[^37]: See on the idea of a natural sense of justice also Gustave de Molinari, *The Production of Security* (Burlingame, Calif.: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 2, 1977).

This so obviously true theory has the most radical practical-political implications. It refutes as ethically unjustifiable and economically counterproductive actions such as taxation, the legislative redistribution of private property rights, the creation of fiat money, fractional reserve banking, and ultimately, the very institution of state government. It demands instead a pure private property society, an anarchy of private property owners, regulated exclusively by private property law.[^38] By virtue of this, the Austrian School is brought into fundamental opposition to any exercise of governmental power. Recognizing it as their natural and most dangerous intellectual enemy, those in power have done everything possible to stamp out its memory and substitute statolatry for ethics and economics. As Mises writes:

[^38]: On this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*; idem, *Power and Market*, idem, *For A New Liberty*; idem, *The Ethics of Liberty*; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); idem, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*.

> Despots and democratic majorities are drunk with power. They must reluctantly admit that they are subject to the laws of nature. But they reject the very notion of economic law. Are they not the supreme legislator? ...It is impossible to understand the history of economic thought if one does not pay attention to the fact that economics as such is a challenge to the conceit of those in power. An economist can never be a favorite of autocrats and demagogues. With them he is always the mischief-maker, and the more they are inwardly convinced that his objections are well founded, the more they hate him.[^39]

[^39]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 67.

In the present situation of a worldwide crisis of governmental legitimacy, of the collapse of East Bloc Socialism, and of the enduring stagnation of the Western Welfare States, the chance for Austrian rationalism to fill the philosophical vacuum that has appeared with the retreat of positivism and to become the paradigm of the future is as good or better than ever.[^40] Now as before it requires moral courage as much as intellectual integrity to propound the Austrian social theory—the opposing statist battalions still represent a formidable majority and are in control of a far larger share of resources. Nonetheless, with the total breakdown of socialism and the concept of social ownership staring everyone in the face, the antithetical Austrian theory of private property, free markets and laissez faire cannot but gain attractiveness and win support. Austrians have reason to believe that the time has come when they may succeed in bringing about a fundamental change in public opinion, by reclaiming ethics and economics from the hands of the positivists and the engineering powerful and by restoring public recognition of private property rights and free markets based on such rights as ultimate, absolute principles of ethics and economics.

[^40]: For a strategic assessment of the present age from an Austrian perspective see Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right: The Prospects for Liberty”, and “Ludwig von Mises and the Paradigm of Our Age”, in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974).
