###

So far it has been demonstrated that the right of original appropriation through actions is compatible with and implied by the nonaggression principle as the logically necessary presupposition of argumentation. Indirectly, of course, it has also been demonstrated that any rule specifying different rights cannot be justified. Before entering a more detailed analysis, though, of *why* it is that any alternative ethic is indefensible, a discussion which should throw some additional light on the importance of some of the stipulations of the libertarian theory of property, a few remarks about what is and what is not implied by classifying these latter norms as justified is in order.

In making this argument, one would not have to claim to have derived an “ought” from an “is”. In fact, one can readily subscribe to the almost generally accepted view that the gulf between “ought” and “is” is logically unbridgeable.[^26] Rather, classifying the rulings of the libertarian theory of property in this way is a purely cognitive matter. It no more follows from the classification of the libertarian ethic as “fair” or “just” that one ought to act according to it, than it follows from the concept of validity or truth that one should always strive for it. To say that it is just also does not preclude the possibility of people proposing or even enforcing rules that are incompatible with this principle. As a matter of fact, the situation with respect to norms is very similar to that in other disciplines of scientific inquiry. The fact, for instance, that certain empirical statements are justified or justifiable and others are not does not imply that everybody only defends objective, valid statements. On the contrary, people can be wrong, even intentionally. But the distinction between objective and subjective, between true and false, does not lose any of its significance because of this. Instead, people who would do so would have to be classified as either uninformed or intentionally lying. The case is similar with respect to norms. Of course there are people, lots of them, who do not propagate or enforce norms that can be classified as valid according to the meaning of justification I have given above. However, the distinction between justifiable and nonjustifiable norms does not dissolve because of this, just as that between objective and subjective statement does not crumble because of the existence of uninformed or lying people. Rather, and accordingly, those people who would propagate and enforce such different, invalid norms would again have to be classified as uninformed or dishonest, insofar as one had made it clear to them that their alternative norm proposals or enforcements cannot and never will be justifiable in argumentation. There would be even more justification for doing so in the moral case than in the empirical one, since the validity of the nonaggression principle and that of the principle of original appropriation through action as its logically necessary corollary must be considered to be even more basic than any kind of valid or true statements. For what is valid or true has to be defined as that upon which everyone—acting according to this principle—can possibly agree. As I have just shown, at least the implicit acceptance of these rules is the necessary prerequisite to being able to be alive and argue at all.

[^26]: On the problem of deriving “ought” from “is” see W.D. Hudson, ed., *The Is-Ought Question* (London: Macmillan 1969).

Why is it then that other nonlibertarian property theories fail to be justifiable? First, it should be noted, as will become clear shortly, that all of the practiced alternatives to libertarianism and most of the theoretically proposed nonlibertarian ethics would not even pass the first formal universalization test and would fail for this fact alone! All these versions contain norms within their framework of legal rules which have the form, “some people do, and some people do not”. However, such rules that specify different rights or obligations for different classes of people have no chance of being accepted as fair by every potential participant in an argument for simply formal reasons. Unless the distinction made between different classes of people happens to be such that it is acceptable to both sides as grounded in the nature of things, such rules would not be acceptable because they would imply that one group is awarded legal privileges at the expense of complementary discriminations against another group. Some people, either those who are allowed to do something or those who are not, would not be able to agree that these were fair rules.[^27] Since most alternative ethical proposals, as practiced or preached, have to rely on the enforcement of rules such as “some people have the obligation to pay taxes, and others have the right to consume them,” or “some people know what is good for you and are allowed to help you get these alleged blessings even if you do not want them, but you are not allowed to know what is good for them and help them accordingly,” or “some people have the right to determine who has too much of something and who too little, and others have the obligation to accept that,” or even more plainly, “the computer industry must pay to subsidize the farmers, the employed for the unemployed, the ones without kids for those with kids,” or vice versa. They all can be discarded as serious contenders to the claim of being a valid theory of norms qua property norm, because they all indicate by their very formulation that they are not universalizable.

[^27]: See Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty*, p. 45.

What is wrong with a nonlibertarian ethic if this is resolved and there is indeed a theory formulated that contains exclusively universalizable norms of the type “nobody is allowed to” or “everybody can?” Even then the validity of such proposals could never hope to be proven—not because of formal reasons but because of their material specifications. Indeed, while the alternatives that can be refuted easily as regards their claim to moral validity on simple formal grounds can at least be practiced, the application of those more sophisticated versions that would pass the universalization test would prove for material reasons to be fatal: even if one tried to, they simply could never be implemented.

There are two related specifications in the libertarian property theory with at least one of which any alternative theory comes into conflict. According to the libertarian ethic, the first such specification is that aggression is defined as an invasion of the *physical* integrity of other people’s property.[^28] There are popular attempts to define it as an invasion of the *value* or *psychic integrity* of other people’s property. Conservatism, for instance, aims at preserving a given distribution of wealth and values and attempts to bring those forces which could change the status quo under control by means of price controls, regulations, and behavioral controls. Clearly, in order to do so property rights to the value of things must be assumed to be justifiable, and an invasion of values, *mutatis mutandis*, would have to be classified as unjustifiable aggression. Not only does conservatism use this idea of property and aggression; redistributive socialism does, too. Property rights to values must be assumed to be legitimate when redistributive socialism allows me, for instance, to demand compensation from people whose chances or opportunities negatively affect mine. The same is true when compensation for committing psychological, or “structural violence” is requested.[^29] In order to be able to ask for such compensation, what one must have done, namely affect my opportunities, my psychic integrity, or my feeling of what is owed to me, would have to be classified as an aggressive act.

[^28]: On the importance of the definition of aggression as physical aggression see also Rothbard, ibid., chaps. 8–9; idem, “Law, Property Rights and Air Pollution,” *Cato Journal* (Spring, 1982).

[^29]: On the idea of structural violence as distinct from physical violence see Dieter Senghass, ed., *Imperialismus und strukturelle Gewalt* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1972). The idea of defining aggression as an invasion of property *values* also underlies both the theories of justice of John Rawls and Robert Nozick, however different these two authors may have appeared to be to many commentators. For how could Rawls think of his so-called difference-principle (“Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are reasonably expected to be to everyone’s—including the least advantaged ones—advantage or benefit,” John Rawls, *A Theory of Justice* [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press 1971], pp. 60–83, 75ff.), as justified unless he believes that simply by increasing his relative wealth a more fortunate person commits an aggression, and a less fortunate one then has a valid claim against the more fortunate person only because the former’s relative position in terms of value has deteriorated?! And how could Robert Nozick claim it to be justified for a “dominant protection agency” to outlaw competitors, regardless of what their actions would have been like? (Robert Nozick, *Anarchy, State, and Utopia* [New York: Basic Books, 1974], pp. 55f.) Or how could he believe it to be morally correct to outlaw so-called nonproductive exchanges, i.e., exchanges where one party would be better off if the other one did not exist at all or at least had nothing to do with it (as, for instance, in the case of a blackmailee and a blackmailer), regardless of whether or not such an exchange involved physical invasion of any kind (ibid., pp. 83–86) unless he thought that the right to have the integrity of one’s property values (rather than its physical integrity) preserved existed? For a devastating critique of Nozick’s theory in particular see Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty*, chap. 29; on the fallacious use of the indifference curve analysis, employed both by Rawls and Nozick, idem, *Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series, No. 3, 1977).

Why is this idea of protecting the value of property unjustifiable? First, while every person, at least in principle, can have full control over whether or not his actions cause the *physical* characteristics of something to change and hence can also have full control over whether or not those actions are justifiable, control over whether or not one’s actions affect the *value* of somebody else’s property does not rest with the acting person but rather with other people and their subjective evaluations. Thus, no one could determine *ex ante* if his actions would be qualified as justifiable or unjustifiable. One would first have to interrogate the whole population to make sure that one’s planned actions would not change another person’s evaluations regarding his own property. Even then nobody could act until universal agreement was reached on who is supposed to do what with what, and at which point in time. Clearly, because of all the practical problems involved, everyone would be long dead and nobody could argue any longer, well before agreement could be reached.[^30] Even more decisively, this position regarding property and aggression could not even be effectively *argued* because arguing in favor of any norm implies that there is conflict over the use of some scarce resources; otherwise, there would simply be no need for discussion. However, in order to argue that there is a way out of such conflicts it must be presupposed that actions must be allowed *prior* to any actual agreement or disagreement because if they were not, one could not even argue so. Yet if one can do this, and insofar as it exists as an argued intellectual position the position under scrutiny must assume that one can, then this is only possible because of the existence of *objective* borders of property—borders which anyone can recognize as such on his own without having to agree first with anyone else with respect to his system of values and evaluations. Such a value-protecting ethic, too, in spite of what it says, must in fact presuppose the existence of objective property borders rather than of borders determined by subjective evaluations, if only in order to have any surviving persons who can make its moral proposals.

[^30]: See also Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty*, p. 46.

The idea of protecting value instead of physical integrity also fails for a second related reason. Evidently, one’s value, for example on the labor or marriage market, can be and indeed is affected by other people’s physical integrity or degree of physical integrity. Thus, if one wanted property values to be protected, one would have to allow physical aggression against people. However, it is only because of the very fact that a person’s borders—that is the borders of a person’s property in his own body as his domain of exclusive control that another person is not allowed to cross unless he wishes to become an aggressor—are *physical* borders (intersubjectively ascertainable, and not just subjectively fancied borders) that everyone can agree on anything independently (and agreement means agreement among independent decision-making units!). Only because the protected borders of property are objective (i.e., fixed and recognizable as fixed prior to any conventional agreement), can there be argumentation and possibly agreement of and between independent decision-making units. Nobody could argue in favor of a property system defining borders of property in subjective, evaluative terms because simply to be able to say so presupposes that, contrary to what theory says, one must in fact be a physically independent unit saying it.

ko si itọkasi fun ishele iṣeduro aṣa miiran nigbati ọkan ba yipada si alaye ti o ṣe pataki ti awọn ipinnu ti ofin libertarian ti ohun-ini. Awọn ilana ipilẹ ti libertarianism ti wa ni ipo ko nikan nipasẹ awọn otitọ pe ohun ini ati ifagbaralo ti wa ni telẹ ni awọn ofin ara; kii ṣe pataki si pe ohun-ini ni a sọ gẹgẹbi ikọkọ, ohun-ini ẹni-kọọkan ati pe itumọ atilẹba imudaniloju atilẹba, eyi ti o tumọ si ṣe iyatọ laarin saaju ati nigbamii, ti ni pato. O wa pẹlu fifiye si afikun yii bakanna pe iyatọ, awọn iwa-oni-ara-ẹni ti ko ni awọn aṣoju wa sinu ariyanjiyan. Dipo ti o mọ pataki pataki ti iyasọtọ ti iṣaaju-nigbamii ni ṣiṣe ipinnu laarin awọn idiyele ti ohun ija ti o ni idiwọn, nwọn fi awọn aṣa ṣe eyi ti o mu ki o sọ pe ayo jẹ ko ṣe pataki fun ṣiṣe ipinnu bẹ bẹ ati pe awọn ti o pẹ ni o ni ẹtọ lati ni nini bi akọkọ -comers. O han ni, ero yi jẹ eyiti o jẹ nigbati alagbọọjọpọ awujọ ti n ṣalaye fun awọn onibajẹ onibajẹ ti ọrọ ati / tabi awọn ajogun wọn san owo-ori kan ki awọn alailẹgbẹ ti o ti pẹ to le kopa ninu agbara rẹ. O jẹ al nitorina nigbati o ba ni oluwa ohun-ini kan ti o ni agbara mu lati dinku (tabi mu) ohun ti o wa lọwọlọwọ ni ifẹ ti ọmọ-ọmọ. Awọn igba mejeeji o ni oye lati ṣe ohun ti ọkan ṣe nigbati o ba pe pe ẹni ti o ṣajọpọ ọrọ ni akọkọ, tabi lilo awọn ohun-ini adayeba akọkọ, ti nitorina ṣe idaniloju lodi si diẹ ninu awọn to ma n pe de. Ti wọn ko ba ṣe nkan ti ko tọ si, lẹhinna awọn ti o ti kọja-yẹ ki o ko ni iru ẹtọ bẹ si wọn.[^31]

[^31]: Fun igbiyanju imoye ti o ni imọran lati da ofin olori ti o ti pẹ lọwọ wo James P. Sterba, * Awọn ibere ti Idajọ * (Notre Dame, Ind .: Notre Dame University Press, 1980), esp. pp. 58ff., 137ff .; lori absurdity ti iru oníṣe wo Rothbard, * Eniyan, Owo, ati Ipinle *, p. 427

Kini o jẹ aṣiṣe pẹlu ero yii ti fifọ iyatọ ti o ti kọja-nigbamii bi ai ṣe pataki? Ni akọkọ, ti awọn ti o ti pẹ (awọn ti ko ṣe ohun kan pẹlu awọn ohun elo ti ko niye), nitootọ ni o ni ẹtọ fun wọn bi awọn akọkọ (awọn ti o ṣe ohun kan pẹlu awọn ọja ti ko niye), lẹhinna ko si ẹnikan ti yoo jẹ ki a ṣe ohunkohun pẹlu ohunkohun, gẹgẹbi ọkan yoo ni lati ni gbogbo awọn igbesẹ ti o ma pe de ṣaaju ṣiṣe ohun ti ọkan fẹ lati ṣe. Nitootọ, bi ọmọ-ọmọ-ọmọ kan yoo ni awọn ọmọ ọmọ ọkan-awọn eniyan ti o wa ni pẹ to pe ẹnikan ko le beere fun wọn-lati ṣe agbero eto ti ofin ti ko lo fun iyasọtọ ti iṣaju-lẹhinna gẹgẹbi apakan ti ero imọran abẹ-ọrọ jẹ aṣoye nitoripe o tumọ si pe o n pe iku sugbon o gbọdọ ṣe igbesi aye lati dabaa ohunkohun. Bẹni awa, tabi awọn baba wa, tabi awọn ọmọ wa le ṣe, tabi yoo wa laaye tabi sọ tabi jiyan ohunkohun ti ọkan ba tẹle ofin yii. Ni ibere fun eyikeyi eniyan-ti o ti kọja, bayi tabi ojo iwaju-lati jiyan ohunkohun o gbọdọ jẹ ṣeeṣe lati yọ ninu ewu bayi. Ko si eni ti o le duro ti o si duro titi o fi jẹ pe gbogbo eniyan ti o ti jẹ alailẹgbẹ ti awọn ti o ti pẹ to wa lati wa ni ayika ati lati gba ohun ti ọkan fẹ ṣe. Kàkà bẹẹ, níwọn ìgbà tí ènìyàn bá rí ara rẹ nìkan, ó gbọdọ ní agbára láti ṣe, láti lo, láti ṣe, àti láti jẹ kí àwọn ẹrù ṣòro lọ, láìsí ìfẹnukò kankan pẹlú àwọn ènìyàn tí kì í ṣe nìkan (àti bóyá kò ní jẹ). Niwọn ti eniyan ba ri ara rẹ ni ile awọn elomiran ati pe ariyanjiyan wa lori bi o ṣe le lo awọn ohun elo ti a ko fun, o gbọdọ ni iṣoro lati yanju iṣoro naa ni aaye pataki kan ni akoko pẹlu nọmba ti o niyeye ti awọn eniyan dipo ti o ni lati duro de ti ko ni iduro awọn akoko ti akoko fun awọn nọmba ti a ko yan ti awọn eniyan. Nipasẹ ki o le ni igbala lọwọ, lẹhinna, eyi ti o jẹ pataki ṣaaju lati jiyan ni ojurere tabi lodi si ohunkohun, awọn ẹtọ ohun-ini ko le loyun bi ailati ailopin ati ailopin nipa nọmba awọn eniyan ti o kan. Kàkà bẹẹ, wọn gbọdọ ronú ni bi o ti bẹrẹ nipasẹ sise ni awọn ipinnu pataki ni akoko fun awọn eniyan ti o ṣe pataki.[^32]

[^32]: O yẹ ki a akiyesi nibi pe nikan ti awọn ẹtọ ohun-ini ti wa ni ero gangan gẹgẹbi awọn ẹtọ-ini ohun ini ti o ni akoko lẹhin naa o ṣee ṣe lati ṣe awọn ifowo siwe. O han kedere, awọn ifowo siwe ni awọn adehun laarin awọn nọmba ti ara ẹni ti o niiṣe ti ara ẹni ti o da lori iyasọtọ ti owo kọọkan ti o ni ẹtọ si ara ẹni ni ẹtọ si awọn ohun ti o ti ra ṣaaju ni akoko si adehun naa ati eyi ti o jẹ ki iṣan gbigbe awọn akọle ohun-ini si awọn ohun kan pato lati ipilẹṣẹ tẹlẹ eni ti o ni pato nigbamii. Ko si iru nkan bẹẹ bi awọn adehun ti o le jẹ labẹ ofin ti o jẹ ti oṣiṣẹ ti o pẹ-pẹlẹpẹlẹ!

Pẹlupẹlu, imọran ti fifọ iyasọtọ ti iṣaaju-lẹhinna yoo jẹ ni ibamu pẹlu awọn ofin ti o ni idaniloju gẹgẹbi ipilẹ ti o ni idaniloju. Lati jiyan ati pe o ṣee ṣe pẹlu ẹnikan (ti o ba jẹ otitọ nikan pe iyasọtọ wa) tumo si lati ṣe iranti ẹtọ ti o toju fun iṣakoso iyasoto lori ara ti ara rẹ. Bibẹkọ ti, o le soro fun enikeni lati sọ ohunkohun ni aaye pataki kan ni akoko ati fun ẹlomiiran lati ni esi lati dahun, nitori bẹni akọkọ tabi alakoso keji yoo jẹ ẹya ipinnu ipinnu ara eni ni eyikeyi akoko. Ti o dinku iyatọ ti iṣaaju-nigbamii, lẹhinna, jẹ eyiti o ṣe pataki lati ṣe imukuro o ṣee ṣe lati jiyan ati nini adehun. Sibẹsibẹ, bi ọkan ko le jiyan pe ko si iyasọtọ fun fanfa laisi iṣakoso iṣaaju ti gbogbo eniyan lori ara rẹ ti a mọ ati ti a gba gẹgẹbi ẹwà, aṣa ti o pẹ to ti ko ṣe iyatọ yii le ko gba ẹnikẹni laye. Nipasẹ * sọ pe o le jẹ pe ibanujẹ, nitori pe ẹnikan ni anfani lati sọ bẹ yoo ṣe igbesi aye ẹnikan fun ipinnu ipinnu ipinnu ipinnu kan ni ipinnu pataki kan ni akoko.

Nibi, ọkan ni a fi agbara mu lati pinnu pe aṣa olutalara ko nikan ni a le da lare ati lare nipasẹ iṣaro a priori, ṣugbọn pe ko si oníṣe miiran ti a le dabobo ni ariyanjiyan.
