Ni igbiyanju won lati tun ko ariyanjiyan yii, Selgin ati White akoko gba idiyele aaye pataki: "A gba pe ipinnu akoko ati idiyele owo ni pato, ati pe ayipada ninu okan ko ni iyipada ninu elomiran." [^39] Bakanna:

> [p]e jadii owo je apere kan ti fifipamo ko se afihan pe ilosoke ninu iwuwo fun owo je idaniloju ilosoke ninu lapapo ipamo. Ipese ti o po si fun owo le se alabapin pelu agbara ti o dinku fun idaniloju awon ohun elo miiran, kii se idinku ninu agbara; nibi ti o le je apakan ti iyipada ninu ona ti fifipamo pelu laisi iyipada ninu ifowopamo gbogbo. [^40]

Sibesibe, ti o ba je pe agbara ti o po sii fun owo ko ni idaniloju ilosoke ninu ifowopamo gbogbo, lehinna ko see se lati setoju pe o pese fun omi iluwe ti o tobi julo ti owo-isowo ti o san owo ati iseduro  poju (igbise gigun ti eto ise). Nibi, lati gba igbasile iwe-oro-aje won sile, lesekese tele ategun yii Selgin ati White gbiyanju lati tun mu u pada nipa jiyan pe:

> Lai bi kita [aifowoyi ti akoko isodi ati owo owuro bii] lati mu owo * je * lati mu u fun * inawo * nigbamii, bi o tile je pe * melo nigbami * ko se ami (ati pe a ko ti pinnu nipase owo- dimu). Idaduro owo fun inawo nigbamii, dipo lilo ina lori agbara bayi, yoo da afeyinti fun lilo si ojo iwaju. Gege bi Hoppe tikarare se akiyesi, ibere fun owo lati inu irorun ti o fun laaye ni okan ninu rira "onibara tabi gbe awon oja ni ailopin * ojo akoko*." Nitorina boya iyato wa nibi je lori oro nikan. [^41]

Lai sanu, imoran yii je eyiti ko ni idi. Dipo ju oro ti n salaye, iyato je ohun pataki kan nipa iru owo.

O soro lati ko awon asotele meji ti tele ti o lodi si. Selgin ati White gbiyanju lati yo kuro ninu ipari yii nipase ona ayokele kan, ti o je, ni siso owo gege bi ojo iwaju ti o dara. Ni pataki, ariyanjiyan won ni pe lakoko ti imunwo agbara owo kii se afihan ifowopamo ti o po sii, o pese fun lilo owo-ina ti o tobi julo, nitori pe owo nikan ni a lo "awon ojo aseyomo" ojo-aaya (awon itokasi won), bii pe alekun sii ibere fun owo je nigba gbogbo ati ni akoko kanna ilosoke ninu iwuwo fun awon oja iwaju.[^42] Sibe owo je ifihan * ko * ojo iwaju ti o dara. Ni otito, nigbati o ba lo owo naa –ni ojo iwaju –o padanu gbogbo anfani re fun eni to wa bayi. O ni anfani nikan lakoko ti o ba je pe o ko lo, ati pe ohun kiko re bi didara ti o dara bayi nwaye lati ipo ti eniyan ni idaniloju * aidaniloju*.[^43]

Asise ni sise ipinnu owo bi ojo iwaju ti o dara ni a le fi han ni ona meji. Ni apa kan, odi, o le han pe irora yii si ilodi. Ni atileyin ti akowe won, Selgin ati White so pe "idaniloju owo fun awon igbamii nigbamii, kuku ki o lo lori lilo bayi, o da afeyinti fun lilo si ojo iwaju," eyiti o n so pe idaduro owo je pasipaaro kan ti o dara to iwaju (itelorun) fun okan bayi. Ni gbolohun ti o tele won gbawo pe owo ti o waye ni lilo ko si lori awon oja ti n sowo tabi ko se awon oja. Sibesibe won kuna lati se akiyesi pe eyi tumo si tun, bi abajade die, ti o ni idaniloju owo fun inawo nigbamii, dipo lilo re lori sise bayi, yoo dawo gbigbejade (ati lo agbara iwaju) si ojo iwaju. Ti idaniloju owo ba da agbara ati agbara sise, sibesibe, o di idise lati setoju pe olutoju owo naa ti ni idoko-owo ni ojo iwaju, nitori ko si awon oja iwaju-boya onibara tabi se awon oja-eyi ti o jasi lati ise ti idaduro owo ati eyiti ohun ti on mu re le ni eto. Sibesibe bi awon eto si ko si awon oja iwaju ni ohunkohun ti, owo yoo je asan. Nipa fifiranse, ti owo ko ba se asan (ati pe ko si okan yoo gba owo ti o ko ni iye), lehinna iye re gbodo je eyiti o dara bayi.

Ni apa keji, daadaa, iru owo bi ohun ti o dara lowolowo ni a le fi idi re mule nipase eri imudaniloju. Gege bi Mises ati Rothbard ti salaye, ni idiyele gbogbo tabi, die sii ni ifarahan, laarin iseduro isowo ti aje ajeji, ko si owo wa. Pelu gbogbo awon aiyede nipa iseduro idibaje, gbogbo eniyan yoo mo awon oro naa, awon igba, ati awon ipo ti gbogbo awon iyipada iwaju, ati gbogbo awon pasipaaro le se atunse ni ibamu ati ki o gba apere ti taara ju isiro ti ko to.

> Ninu eto ti ko ni iyipada ninu eyi ti ko si idaniloju eyikeyikan nipa ojo iwaju, ko si eniti o nilo lati mu owo. Olukuluku eniyan ni o mo iye owo ti yoo nilo ni ojo iwaju. Nitorina o wa ni ipo lati ya gbogbo awon owo ti o gba ni ona kan ti awon gbese naa kuna nitori ojo ti yoo nilo won.[^44]

Lakoko ti ko si aaye fun owo ni iselopo aje ajeji, sibesibe, nibe wa laarin apere re bayi ati ojo iwaju, bayi ati nigbamii, ibere ise kan ati ipari ikehin, lesekese awon ohun elo onisepo oja (awon oja bayi ) ati ise-sise ti ko ni irorun ti o n gbe awon oja (awon oja iwaju), ona ti iselopo, ati ifipamo ati idoko-owo, eyini ni, pasipaaro ti bayi si awon oja iwaju ti o sakoso nipase akoko. Ti o ba je pe ohunkohun, eyi tun se afihan pe owo ati owo fun owo ni ona ti ko ni afihan si agbara, iseduro, ati akoko, ati pe orisun ibiti o wulo ti owo gbodo je iyato ti o yato si ti awon oja ti nlo ati lati saja awon oja. Orisun anfani ti onibara ti o dara je iseduro taara ati bayi, ati orisun ibiti o je oludelopo ti o dara julo je ise-sise alaise-aseju iwaju. Owo, nipa idakeji, ko je ki o run tabi lilo ni sise. Ko je ise-sise ti o taara (gege bi awon oja ti n sowo ni) ko wulo lailewu bi ibudo ona kan si awon oja isowo iwaju (bi awon oja ti o saja). Kaka bee, isura ti owo gbodo je ti aseyomo ti ara re sibe ti o je ti isaselowo.

Ni idakeji isaro isowo ti isowo ti n yipada, labe ipo eniyan ailopin ti aidaniloju, nigbati awon ofin, awon akoko, ati awon ipo ti gbogbo awon pasipaaro iwaju ko le wa ni asotele pelu otito, ati nigba ti igbese ba je nipa alaye nipa ti ara ati koko si asise, eniyan le laapo le beere fun awon oja ti ko ni iyasoto lori idiyele won (bayi tabi ojo iwaju), sugbon tun nitori iye won bi * media of exchange * (fun awon idi atunse). Ni idojuko pelu awon ipo ibi ti, nitori aisi awon ifarahan meji ti o fe, pasipaaro kan ko seese, eniyan le se akojopo awon oja naa nitori idiyele ti isowo won, o si le se isowo nigbakugba ti o dara lati gba ni die sii ju oja lo si je igbasile, bii pe ohun-ini re yoo dero idaduro awon oja ati awon ise ti o taara tabi taara. Pelupelu, nitoripe ise-sise nikan ti alabode ti pasipaaro lati sawari awon rira ni awon oja ti o ni eto taara tabi ti ko ni itosi, eniyan yoo fefe fun rira die sii ti o see se die sii, ati, ni opin, alabode ti isowo oja gbogbo ti o kere ju tabi eniti o je ami-oja kan ti kii se ojulowo, iru eyi

> [T]here would be an inevitable tendency for the less marketable of a series of goods used as media of exchange to be one by one rejected until at last only a single commodity remained, which was universally employed as a medium of exchange; in a word, money.[^45]

Selgin and White are familiar with this Mengerian-Misesian reconstruction of monetary evolution, of course. They apparently fail to recognize, however, that this feature of money as the most easily and widely salable commodity far from rendering it a future good, qualifies money at the same time as the good best suited to alleviate presently felt uncertainty and, as such, the most universally present good of all.[^46] Although only indirectly useful—in this regard like producer goods, and unlike any consumer good—money is precisely on account of its supreme saleability a uniquely present good—in this regard like consumer goods, and unlike any producer good. Because money can be employed for the instant removal of the widest range of possible needs (or the satisfaction of the widest range of possible desires), it provides its owner with the best humanly possible protection (insurance) against uncertainty; that is, against his uneasiness of *not* being able to predict—of *not* being certain about—all of his future needs and desires. In holding money, its owner gains in the satisfaction of being able instantly to meet, as they arise unpredictably, the widest possible range of future contingencies.

> The keeping of cash holding requires sacrifices. To the extent that a man keeps money in his pockets or in his balance with a bank, he forsakes the instantaneous acquisition of goods he could consume or employ for production.[^47]

Accordingly, to the extent that he feels certain regarding his future, a man will want to invest in consumer and producer goods. Only to the extent that he feels uncertain about his future will he want to make the sacrifice referred to by Mises; that is, will he possibly want to invest in relief from any uneasiness felt concerning the uncertainty of his future consumption—production (income—expenditure) pattern. Hence, rather than indicating his increased willingness to sacrifice present satisfaction in exchange for future satisfaction, an increased demand for money demonstrates a man’s more intensely felt uncertainty regarding his future; and rather than being an investment in the future, an addition to his cash balance represents an investment in present certainty (protection) vis-à-vis a future perceived as less certain.[^48]

In light of this praxeological reconstruction of money as a singularly present good, Selgin and White’s entire positive case for fractional reserve banking is revealed as mistaken. If banks indeed accommodate an (unanticipated) increased demand for money through the temporary issue of additional fiduciary media (credit), as Selgin and White propose, this can have only disruptive and disequilibrating effects. If and insofar as the accommodating response on the part of the banks is unanticipated, the interest rate will be reduced temporarily below its natural height, investment will increase, and the structure of production will be lengthened. Yet this result is fundamentally at odds with the public’s demonstrated preference. The public perceives the future as more (increasingly) uncertain and, accordingly, in striving to increase the size of its cash holdings and thereby bidding the prices of nonmoney goods down and correspondingly increasing the purchasing power per unit money, is intent upon providing for more (increased) present protection against uncertainty. To commit additional resources to the future is the expression of *less* public uncertainty (rather than more), and thus stands at cross-purpose to the public’s actual wishes and implies a systematic misallocation of resources (to be revealed in a boom-bust cycle). And in any case, even if the banks’ accommodating money supply increase could be fully anticipated and the structure of production were not unduly lengthened, any such accommodation would still be disruptive, because—even apart from its inescapable redistributionist consequences—it can only *delay* the arrival of the desired goal. In order to be better protected against perceived uncertainty, prices must fall and the purchasing power of money must rise. With an additional influx of money, it cannot but take *longer* before this goal is accomplished.[^49]

### A Final Note: Some Mistaken Analogies

In light of the fundamental distinction between property (money) and property titles (money substitutes) explained in earlier sections of this article and the foregoing elucidation of money as a uniquely present good, several analogies popularly employed in the attempted justification of fractional reserve banking can be finally disposed of as mistaken. Even if they correctly distinguish between property titles (tickets) and property, all proposed analogies—between fractional reserve banking on the one hand and airline overbooking, fractional reserve parking lots, lotteries, and insurance on the other hand—fail to recognize properly the fundamental distinction between present and future goods.

The owner of a title to money owns a present good (money property)—an indirectly yet immediately serviceable good. The fractional reserve banker is found guilty of fraud; he issued and sold additional titles to an unchanged quantity of money property. In distinct contrast; the owner of an airline ticket owns a future good. Hence, in overbooking *now* (today) a flight at a future date (tomorrow), an airline cannot possibly have committed fraud already now (today). Fraud cannot occur until tomorrow, when the tickets must be actually redeemed, and only if the airline is then unable to satisfy each and every ticket holder’s claim. In fact, airlines typically fulfill their contractual obligation: each ticket holder is assured a seat on the scheduled flight, because the airline is prepared to pay every excess ticket holder off, that is, to repurchase his ticket at a price (by exchange of another good) that the holder considers more valuable than his present airline seat. And certainly, no airline typically oversells spot-tickets (titles to seats right now, that is, present goods) and assigns two people to occupy the same seat, which is essentially what fractional reserve banking amounts to.

Similarly, the owner of a fractionally covered parking permit (with more permit holders than parking spaces) does not own a present good. He owns the right to participate for a specified period of time in repeated search for parking space. The owner of the parking facility cannot possibly commit any fraud in selling his permits, unless he then refused entry to a valid permit holder when there was empty space available, or if he changed the contractually agreed upon rules of the game; that is, if he had agreed to print up to a maximum of 200 permits, for instance, but actually printed 300\. It is only the owner of a spot parking ticket, or the owner of a reserved parking space, who are owners of a present good; and there is, of course, characteristically no overselling of spot spaces or of reserved parking.

The same reasoning applies to the case of lotteries. The holder of a lottery ticket does not own any present good. He owns the right to participate in the drawing of specified prizes, whereby it is self-understood among buyer and seller—as inherent in the nature of a lottery—that there are—and must be—more tickets than prizes. The lottery operator cannot possibly have committed any crime, unless he failed to redeem the winning tickets into the promised prizes or surreptitiously changed the preannounced rules of the game. If this is rarely the case, it is practically unheard of that a lottery would print more than one winning ticket for one and the same prize (present good), which would be likewise fraudulent, of course, and which is essentially what fractional reserve bankers do.

Finally, the proposed analogy between fractional reserve banking and insurance has already been refuted implicitly in note 46 above, concerning the relationship between risk and insurance on the one hand and uncertainty and money on the other. Unlike the owner of money, the owner of an insurance policy does not own a present but a future good. An insurance company may be unable to meet its contractually assumed obligations at some future pointin time, and one may then come to the conclusion that it had engaged in an overselling of tickets. However, it is impossible to say that a crime has been already committed now, at the moment when the insurance policy is sold, because the good sold by the insurance agency is a future one. In distinct contrast, the owner of a money ticket is the owner of a present good, and every overissue of tickets to present goods is from the very outset—instantly and immediately—fraudulent, and accordingly is contrary to market ethics.

[^39]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 102.

[^40]: Ibid., p. 103.

[^41]: Ibid., p. 102.

[^42]: Selgin and White’s view here is quite similar to that of Keynes (*The General Theory*, pp. 293–94), when he emphasized that “the importance of money essentially flows from its being a link between the present and the future,” and characterized money as “above all, a subtle device for linking the present and the future.”

[^43]: Put differently: rather than, as Selgin and White (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 102) say, that “the demand for cash stems from the convenience it allows one in purchasing … goods at uncertain *future* dates,” the demand for money stems from the convenience it allows one in purchasing goods at *uncertain* future dates.

[^44]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 249.

[^45]: Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 32–33.

[^46]: In fact, one can only wonder how Selgin and White could have possibly overlooked money’s character as a uniquely present good. After all, the interest rate as the most visible manifestation of the phenomenon of time preference is expressed in terms of *money*.

[^47]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 430\. The term uncertainty is employed here in its technical meaning as defined by Frank H. Knight (*Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit* [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971], esp. chap. 7) and Mises (*Human Action*, esp. chap. 6); that is, as categorically distinct from risk instances of class probability; also Hoppe (“On Certainty and Uncertainty, Or: How Rational Can Our Expectations Be?” *Review of Austrian Economics* 10, no. 1(1979): 49–78). Insofar as man faces a risky future, he does not need to hold cash. In order to satisfy his desire to be protected against risks, he can instead buy (or produce) insurance. A buyer of insurance demonstrates by his purchase that he is in fact *certain* about some future events. Hence, in paying a premium, he sacrifices a present good in exchange for a future one (payment in the event of actual risk-damage) and so contributes to and invests in a physical structure of production. Specifically, his premium becomes embodied in the production structure maintained by his insurance agency. In distinct contrast: insofar as man faces uncertainty he is, quite literally *not certain* concerning his future, that is, as to what will happen to him and when. Hence, in order to be protected against uncertainty, he cannot possibly invest in any future good. Only present goods can insure against instantly arising—unpredictable—events. Nor can he invest in (present) consumer goods (for this would mean that he actually felt certain as to the specific nature of his future contingencies). Only a medium of exchange, on account of its supreme saleability, can insure him against contingencies of an uncertain nature. Hence, just as insurance is the price that must be paid for protection against risks, so cash holdings are the price that must be paid for protection against uncertainty. See also the following final note below.

[^48]: Selgin and White never raise the question of *why* changes in the demand for money occur, and thus never penetrate to their ultimate—microeconomic—sources; that is, changes in individuals’ subjective evaluations of presently perceived personal uncertainty. In contrast, whereas they portray changes in the demand for money as seemingly unmotivated and inexplicable events, Mises is explicit and emphatic about the irrational character:

::::> The advantages and disadvantages derived from cash holding are not objective factors which could directly influence the size of cash holdings. They are put on the scales by each individual and weighed against one another. The result is a subjective judgment of value, colored by the individual’s personality. Different people and the same people at different times value the same objective facts in a different way. Just as knowledge of a man’s wealth and his physical condition does not tell us how much he would be prepared to spend for food of a certain nutritive power, so knowledge about data concerning a man’s material situation does not enable us to make definite assertions with regard to the size of his cash holding. (Mises, *Human Action*, p. 430)

[^49]: Mises summarizes:

::::> The services money renders are conditioned by the height of its purchasing power. Nobody wants to have in his cash holding a definite number of pieces of money or a definite weight of money; he wants to keep a cash holding of a definite amount of purchasing power. As the operation of the market tends to determine the final state of money’s purchasing power at a height at which the supply of and the demand for money coincide, there can never be an excess or a deficiency of money. Each individual and all individuals together always enjoy fully the advantages which they can desire from indirect exchange and the use of money, no matter whether the total quantity of money is great or small. Changes in money’s purchasing power generate changes in the disposition of wealth among the various members of society. From the point of view of people eager to be enriched by such changes, the supply of money may be called insufficient or excessive, and the appetite for such gains may result in policies designed to bring about cash-induced alterations in purchasing power. However, the services which money renders can be neither improved nor repaired by changing the supply of money. There may appear an excess or a deficiency of money in an individual’s cash holding. But such a condition can be remedied by increasing or decreasing consumption or investment. (Of course, one must not fall prey to the popular confusion between the demand for money for cash holding and the appetite for more wealth.) The quantity of money available in the whole economy is always sufficient to secure for everybody all that money does and can do. (Mises, *Human Action*, p. 421)
