### Utilitarianians ati Randians la. Idi

[^ 0]: Fesi si "Apero lori Emu Argumentation Hoppe", * Liberty * (Kokanla Osu 1988).

Ko seese tabi ko ye lati koju gbogbo awon ojuami ti a gbe soke ni ijiroro yii. Emi yoo fi oju si awon alailegbe ti o jade ni isoro lodi si ariyanjiyan mi-gbogbo won ti awon onisowo oniruru. Mo yoo se apejuwe ni kukuru lori asa ti Randian.

Ibanuje, Friedman, Yeager, Irin, Omi, Virkkala, ati Jones gbagbo pe emi gbodo ti gbagbe pe gbogbo awon awujo ti o wa tele ko kere ju libertarian (pe eru, gulag, tabi awon oko, ati bebe lo), ati pe eyi bakanna se idamu ariyanjiyan mi. O han ni, Emi yoo soro ko iwe yii ti o ba je ero mi pe libertarianism ti wa tele. Bayi, o ye ki o je pe o je otito ti iwa ti kii se ti ara eni ti otito ti o tori mi lati se afihan nkan ti o yato: idi ti iru ipo ilu yii ko le ni idalare. Ti o se afihan awon otito bi ifipase bi apeere- je ni aijopo lori apa kan pelu kiko eri pe :: 1 + 1 = 2 :: nipa ntokasi pe enikan ti wa pelu 3 bi idahun-ati gan.

Lati tun dape mi pada: Boya tabi kii se nkankan je otito, eke, tabi se aipinnu; boya tabi rara o ti ni idalare; ohun ti a nilo lati le da o; boya Emi, awon alatako mi, tabi ko si okan ninu wa ti o to-gbogbo eyi ni a gbodo pinnu ni abajade ariyanjiyan. Idaniloju yii je otito a priori, nitoripe a ko le se ni lai se idaniloju pe ni isiro naa. Enikan ko le jiyan pe okan ko le jiyan, ati pe okan ko le ni ijiyan mo ohun ti o tumo si pe ki o gbe eto ni eto  lai so pe o kere ju idibaje ti idaniloju yii lati je otito.

Eyi ni a npe ni "a priori ti ariyanjiyan", ati nitori pe ipo ipo ti idaniloju yii, eyiti o ni imoran si "axiomatic action" ti ije-ise, ti Mo pe Mises ni akosile mi. (Ibanuje Virkkala lori eyi ko din ara re nitori pe Mo so ni isedede pe Mises ro ohun ti n gbiyanju lati se ni ko seese.) Pelupelu, o je oye re nipa awon Mises ti o jeyanilenu. Lakoko ti o je otito pe eko-oro- se alaye * nipa* iyasoto, o han ni kii se oran pe iwaroye bi ara ti awon imoran ni eyikeyi ona ti o ni ipa nipase awon ipinnu ti o kere ju. Praxeology contains universally true propositions, and whether or not we choose to accept them does not affect this at all. It is beyond me why that should be any different when it comes to ethical propositions. Virkkala might just as well attack Mises for a “retreat from marginalism” because of his claim that praxeology is *true*.)

With the a priori of argumentation established as an axiomatic starting point, it follows that anything that must be presupposed in the act of proposition-making cannot be propositionally disputed again. It would be meaningless to ask for a justification of presuppositions which make the production of meaningful propositions possible in the first place. Instead, they must be regarded as ultimately justified by every proposition maker. Any specific propositional content that disputed their validity could be understood as implying a performative contradiction (in the sense explained by David Gordon), and hence, as ultimately falsified.

The law of contradiction is one such presupposition. One cannot deny this law without presupposing its validity in the act of denying it. But there is another such presupposition. Propositions are not freefloating entities. They require a proposition maker who in order to produce any validity claiming proposition whatsoever must have exclusive control (property) over some scarce means defined in objective terms and appropriated (brought under control) at definite points in time through homesteading action. Thus, any proposition that would dispute the validity of the homesteading principle of property acquisition or that would assert the validity of a different incompatible principle would be falsified by the act of proposition making in the same way as the proposition “the law of contradiction is false” would be contradicted by the very fact of asserting it. As the praxeological presupposition of proposition making, the validity of the homesteading principle cannot be argumentatively disputed without running into a performative contradiction. Any other principle of property acquisition can then be understood—reflectively—by every proposition maker as ultimately incapable of propositional justification. (Note, in particular, that this includes all proposals which claim it is justified to restrict the range of objects which may be homesteaded. They fail because once the exclusive control over *some* homesteaded means is admitted as justified, it becomes impossible to justify any restriction in the homesteading process—except for a selfimposed one—without thereby running into a contradiction. For if the proponent of such a restriction were consistent, he could have justified control only over some physical means which he would not be allowed to employ for any additional homesteading. Obviously, he could not interfere with another’s extended homesteading simply because of his own lack of physical means to do anything about it justifiably. But if he did interfere, he would thereby inconsistently extend his ownership claims beyond *his* own justly homesteaded means. Moreover, in order to justify this extension he would have to invoke a principle of property acquisition incompatible with the homesteading principle whose validity he would already have admitted.)

My entire argument, then, claims to be an impossibility proof. It is not, as the mentioned critics seem to think, a proof that means to show the impossibility of certain empirical events so that it could be refuted by empirical evidence. Instead, it is a proof that it is impossible to justify nonlibertarian property principles propositionally without falling into contradictions. Whatever such a thing is worth (and I’ll come to this shortly), it should be clear that empirical evidence has absolutely no bearing on it. So what if there is slavery, the gulag, taxation? The proof concerns the issue that claiming such institutions can be justified involves a performative contradiction. It is purely intellectual in nature, like logical, mathematical, or praxeological proofs. Its validity, like theirs, can be established independent of any contingent experiences. Nor is its validity in any way affected, as several critics—most notoriously Waters—seem to think, by whether or not people like, favor, understand, or come to a consensus regarding it, or whether or not they are actually engaged in argumentation.

Since considerations such as these are irrelevant in order to judge the validity of a mathematical proof, for instance, so are they beside the point here. In the same way as the validity of a mathematical proof is not restricted to the moment of proving it, so is the validity of the libertarian property theory not limited to instances of argumentation. If correct, the argument demonstrates its universal justification. (Of all utilitarian critics only Steele takes up the challenge that I had posed for them: that the assignment of property rights cannot be dependent on any later outcome because in this case no one could ever know before the outcome what he was or was not justified to do; and that in advocating a consequentialist position utilitarianism is [strictly speaking] no ethic at all if it fails to answer the alldecisive question “what am I justified to do now”? Steele solves this problem in the same way as he proceeds throughout his comment: by misunderstanding what it is. He misconceives my argument as subject to empirical testing and misrepresents it as claiming to show that “I favor a libertarian ethic” follows from “I am saying something”, while in fact it claims that entirely independent of whatever people happen to favor or utter “the libertarian ethic can be given an ultimate propositional justification” follows from “I claim such and such to be valid, i.e., capable of propositional justification”. His response to the consequentialist problem is yet another stroke of genius: No, says Steele, consequentialism must not involve a praxeologically absurd waiting-for-the-outcome ethic. His example: Certain rules are advocated first, then implemented, and later adjusted depending on outcomes. While this is indeed an example of consequentialism, I fail to see how it should provide an answer to “what are we justified in doing now”? and so escape the absurdities of a waiting-for-the-outcome ethic. The starting point is unjustified [Which rules? Not only the outcome depends on this!]; and the consequentialist procedure is unjustified, too. [Why not adopt rules and stick to them regardless of the outcome?] Steele’s answer to the question “what am I justified in doing”? is “that depends on whatever rules you start out with, then on the outcome of whatever this leads to, and finally on whether or not you care about such an outcome”. Whatever this is, it is no ethic.)

The reaction from the other Randian side, represented by Rasmussen, is different. He has fewer difficulties recognizing the nature of my argument but then asks me in turn “So what? Why should an a priori proof of the libertarian property theory make any difference? Why not engage in aggression anyway”? Why indeed?! But then, why should the proof that ::1+1=2:: make any difference? One certainly can still act on the belief that ::1+1=3::. The obvious answer is “because a propositional justification exists for doing one thing, but not for doing another”. But why should we be reasonable, is the next comeback. Again, the answer is obvious. For one, because it would be impossible to argue against it; and further, because the proponent raising this question would already affirm the use of reason in his act of questioning it. This still might not suffice and everyone knows that it would not, for even if the libertarian ethic and argumentative reasoning must be regarded as ultimately justified, this still does not preclude that people will act on the basis of unjustified beliefs either because they don’t know, they don’t care, or they prefer not to know. I fail to see why this should be surprising or make the proof somehow defective. More than this cannot be done by propositional argument.

Rasmussen seems to think that if I could get an “ought” derived from somewhere (something that Yeager claims I am trying to do though I explicitly denied this), then things would be improved. But this is simply an illusory hope. For even if Rasmussen had proven the proposition that one *ought* to be reasonable and *ought* to act according to the libertarian property ethic, this would still be just another propositional argument. It can no more assure that people will do what they ought to do than my proof can guarantee that they will do what is justified. Where is the difference, and what is all the fuss about? There is and remains a difference between establishing a truth claim and instilling a desire to act upon the truth—with “ought” or without it. It is surely great if a proof can instill this desire. But even if it does not, this can hardly be held against it. It also does not subtract anything from its merit if in some or even many cases a few raw utilitarian assertions prove more successful in persuading anyone of libertarianism than it can do. A proof is still a proof and social psychology remains social psychology.
