
#### Juros

O dinheiro também é "neutro" para os juros. However, interest, unlike money, is praxeologically related to employment and social product.

As money is the result of uncertainty, so interest results from time preference, which is as essential to action as uncertainty (and in a sense to be explained shortly even more so). In acting, an actor not only invariably aims to substitute a more for a less satisfactory state of affairs and so demonstrates a preference for more rather than less goods; he must invariably also consider when in the future his goals will be reached (i.e., the time necessary to accomplish them) as well as a good’s duration of serviceability, and every action thus also demonstrates a universal preference for earlier over later goods and of more over less durable ones. Every action requires some time to attain its goal; since man must consume something sometimes and cannot stop consuming entirely, time is always scarce. Thus, *ceteris paribus*, present or earlier goods are, and must invariably be, valued more highly than future or later ones.[^11] In fact, if man were not constrained by time preference and the only constraint operating were that of preferring more over less, he would invariably choose those production processes that would yield the largest output per input, regardless of the length of time needed for these methods to bear fruit. For instance, instead of building a fishing net first, Crusoe would immediately begin constructing a fishing trawler, as the economically most efficient method for catching fish. That no one, including Crusoe, acts in this way makes it evident that man cannot but “value fractions of time of the same length in a different way according as they are nearer or remoter from the instant of the actor’s decision.”[^12]

[^11]: On the time preference theory of interest see William Stanley Jevons, *Theory of Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1965); Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, *Capital and Interest*, 3 vols. (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian Press, 1959); Richard von Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion* (Vienna: Julius Springer, 1934 [Engl. trans., Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988]); Frank Fetter, *Capital, Interest, and Rent* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1971); Roger Garrison, “In Defense of the Misesian Theory of Interest,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979); idem, “Professor Rothbard and the Theory of Interest,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^12]: Mises, *Human Action,* p. 483.

Thus, constrained by time preference, man will only exchange a present good against a future one if he anticipates thereby increasing his amount of future goods. The rate of time preference, which can be different from person to person and from one point in time to the next, but which can never be anything but positive for everyone, simultaneously determines the height of the premium which present goods command over future ones as well as the amount of savings and investment. The market rate of interest is the aggregate sum of all individual time preference rates, reflecting, so to say, the social rate of time preference, and equilibrating social savings (i.e., the supply of present goods offered for exchange against future goods) and social investment (i.e., the demand for present goods capable of yielding future returns).

No supply of loanable funds could exist without previous savings, i.e., without the abstention from some possible consumption of present goods. Furthermore, no demand for loanable funds would exist if no one were to perceive any opportunity to employ present goods productively (i.e., to invest them so as to produce a future output that would exceed current input). Indeed, if all present goods were consumed and none invested in time-consuming production processes, there would be no interest or time preference rate, or rather, the interest rate would be infinitely high, which outside of the Garden of Eden, would be tantamount to eking out a primitive subsistence living by encountering reality with nothing but one’s bare hands and with nothing but a desire for instantaneous gratification.

A supply of and a demand for loanable funds only arises—and this is the human condition—once it is recognized that indirect, more roundabout, lengthier production processes can yield a larger or better output per input than direct and short ones;[^13] and it is possible, by means of savings, to accumulate the amount of present goods needed to provide for all those wants whose satisfaction during the prolonged waiting time is deemed more urgent than the increment in future well-being expected from the adoption of a more time-consuming production process.[^14]

[^13]: To be sure, not all lengthier production processes are more productive than shorter ones; but under the assumption that man, constrained by time-preference, will invariably and at all times select the shortest conceivable methods of producing some given output, any increase in output then can—praxeologically—only be achieved if the production structure is lengthened.

[^14]: Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 490ff.

So long as this is the case, capital formation and accumulation will set in and continue. Instead of being supported by and engaged in instantaneously gratifying production processes, the originary factors of production, land and labor, are supported by an excess of production over consumption and employed in the production of capital goods. These have no value except as intermediate products in the process of turning out final (consumer) goods. In other words, their value lies in the fact that whoever possesses them can use them to produce other capital goods more efficiently. The excess in value (price) of a capital good over the sum expended on the complementary originary factors required for its production is due to this time difference and the universal fact of time preference. It is the price paid for buying time; for moving closer to the completion of one’s ultimate goal rather than having to start at the very beginning. Because of time preference, the value of the final output must exceed the sum spent on its factors of production (the price paid for the capital good and all complementary labor services).

The lower the time preference rate, then, the earlier the process of capital formation will set in, and the faster it will lengthen the roundabout structure of production. Any increase in the accumulation of capital goods and in the roundaboutness of the production structure in turn raises the marginal productivity of labor. This leads to either increased employment and/or wage rates, and, in any case (even if the labor supply curve should become backward sloping with increased wages), to a higher wage total.[^15] Supplied with an increased amount of capital goods then, a better paid population of wage earners will produce an overall increased—future—social product, raising at last, after that of the employees, also the real incomes of the owners of capital and land. While interest (time preference) thus has a direct praxeological relation to employment and social income, it has nothing whatsoever to do with money. To be sure, in a money economy there also exists a monetary expression for the social rate of time preference. Yet this does not change the fact that interest and money are systematically independent and unrelated, and interest is a “real,” not a monetary phenomenon. In fact, in the never-never land of equilibrium there would be no place for money because the future by definition would be certain and with all uncertainty removed no one would have any need for cash holdings (whose sole purpose it is, cash being neither productive nor consumable, to have one prepared for not yet known purchases at not yet known dates). Time preference and interest, however, cannot be conceived of as disappearing even then. For even in equilibrium the existing capital structure needs to be constantly maintained over time (so as to prevent it from gradually becoming consumed in the even course of an endlessly repeated pattern of productive operations). There can be no such maintenance, however, without ongoing savings and reinvestments: and there can be no such things as these without the expectation of a positive rate of interest. (Indeed, if the rate of interest paid were zero, capital consumption would result, and one would move out of equilibrium.)[^16]

[^15]: See also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 663f.

[^16]: See also Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 530–32; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 385–86.

Matters become somewhat more complex under conditions of uncertainty, with money actually in use, but the praxeological independence of money and interest remains fully intact. Under these conditions, man invariably has three instead of two alternatives as to how to allocate his current income. He must not only decide how much to allocate to the purchase of present goods and how much to future goods (i.e., how much to consume and how much to invest), but also how much to keep in cash. There are no other alternatives. Yet while man must at all times make adjustments concerning three margins at once, invariably the outcome is determined by two distinct and praxeologically unrelated factors. The consumption/investment proportion is determined by time preference. The source of the demand for cash, on the other hand, is the utility attached to money (i.e., its usefulness in allowing immediate purchases of directly serviceable goods at uncertain future dates). Both factors can vary, independent of one another.

If the supply of money changes, or if the demand for money changes with a given social stock of money, the purchasing power of money will also change. However, aside from causing changes in relative incomes, no such changes in a money unit’s purchasing power would have any effect on overall real income. Incomes in terms of money increase or decrease, yet the purchasing power of money correspondingly falls or rises, leaving real income unchanged. Or, with money incomes unchanged, more or less of it will be held in cash (hoarded), but then the purchasing power of money correspondingly rises or falls, once again leaving the real income purchased with a smaller or larger sum of money unaltered. It is this real income, however, not money as such, to which a man’s time preference schedule is related, and in light of which his effective rate of time preference is determined. Since real income does not change through all these monetary changes, there is no reason to suppose that the rate of time preference will. If, for instance, the Keynesian nightmare of increased hoarding becomes reality and prices generally fall while the purchasing power of money correspondingly rises, this will leave the real investment/consumption proportion entirely unaffected. Unless the time preference schedule is assumed to have changed at the same time, the additional hoards will be drawn from funds that formerly were spent on consumption and from funds that formerly went into investment in the same pre-established proportion, so as to leave real consumption and real investment at precisely their old levels. However, if time-preference is assumed to change concomitantly, then everything is possible. Indeed, if the additional hoards come exclusively from previous consumption spending, an increased demand for money can go hand in hand even with a fall in the rate of interest and increased investment. Yet this is due not to changes in the demand for money but exclusively to a change (a fall) in the time preference schedule.[^17]

[^17]: See also Murray N. Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975), pp. 39–41.

#### The Capitalist Process

With the division of labor established and extended to its ultimate limit via the development of a universal medium of exchange, the process of economic development is essentially determined by time preference.

To be sure, there are other factors that are important: the quality and quantity of the population, the endowment with nature-given resources, and the state of technology. Yet of these, the quality of a people is largely beyond anyone’s control and must be taken as a given: the quantity of a population may or may not advance economic development, depending on whether the population is below or above its optimum size for a given-sized territory: and nature-given resources or technological know-how can only have an economic impact if discovered and utilized. To do this, though, there must be prior savings and investment. It is not the availability of resources and technical or scientific knowledge that imposes limits on economic advancement: rather, it is time preference that imposes limits on the exploitation of actually available resources as well as on the utilization of existing knowledge (and also on scientific progress for that matter, insofar as research activities, too, must be supported by saved-up funds).

Thus, the only viable path toward economic growth is through savings and investment, governed as they are by time preference. Ultimately there is no way toward prosperity except through an increase in the per capita quota of invested capital. Esta é a única maneira de aumentar a produtividade marginal do trabalho e somente se isso for feito, a renda futura poderá, por sua vez, aumentar. Com o aumento da renda real, a taxa efetiva de preferência de tempo cai (sem, no entanto, nunca atingir zero ou mesmo se se tornar negativa), aumentando ainda mais as doses de investimento, e colocando em movimento um processo espiral ascendente de desenvolvimento econômico.

Não há nenhuma razão para supor que esse processo deveria vir a um interrompimento da chegada ao Jardim do Éden, onde toda a escassez desapareceu - a menos que as pessoas deliberadamente escolham o contrário e comecem a valorizar o lazer adicional mais do que qualquer aumento futuro nos rendimentos reais. Também não há nenhum motivo para supor que o processo de desenvolvimento capitalista seria qualquer coisa que não suave e que a economia iria flexivelmente se ajustar, não apenas a todas as mudanças monetárias, mas também a todas as mudanças na taxa social de preferência de tempo. Claro, desde que o futuro é incerto, haverão erros empresariais, perdas e falências. Mas nenhuma razão sistemática existe porque isso deveria causar mais que interrupções temporárias, ou porque estas interrupções deveriam exceder, ou drasticamente flutuar em torno de, uma "taxa natural" de falhas de negócios. [^18].

[^18]: Veja também Rothbard, *A Grande Depressão Americana*, pp. 12–17.

O caso tornam-se diferente somente se uma instituição extramercado como governo é introduzida. Isso não somente faz o desemprego involuntário possível, conforme explicado acima: a existência de uma agência que efetivamente pode reivindicar a posse sobre os recursos que ela nem tenha se apossado, produzido, nem adquiriu contratualmente, também aumenta a taxa social de preferência de tempo para apossadores, produtores e feitores de contratos e, portanto, cria empobrecimento involuntário, estagnação ou mesmo regressão. É somente através do governo que a humanidade pode ser detida de seu curso natural em direção a uma emancipação gradual da escassez muito antes de chegar ao ponto de um crescimento zero voluntariamente escolhido. [^19]. E é na presença única de um governo, que o processo capitalista possivelmente pode assumir um padrão cíclico (em vez de um suave), com falências seguindo auges. Isentos das regras de aquisição e transferência de propriedade privada, o governo naturalmente deseja um monopólio sobre o dinheiro e a atividade bancária e não quer nada menos que se engajar em atividades bancárias de reservas fracionais (depósito) — em termos não-técnicos: falsificação monopolística — a fim de enriquecer-se à custa dos outros através de meios muito menos conspícuos de fraude, em vez de através de confisco total. [^20]. Ciclos de auge e falência são o resultado da atividade bancária de reservas fracionais fraudulentas. Se e na medida em que o dinheiro falso recém-criado entra a economia como ofertas adicionais no mercado de crédito, a taxa de juros terá que cair abaixo de que outra forma estaria sendo. O crédito deve se tornar mais barato. Ainda, a um preço inferior, mais crédito é levado, e mais recursos são investidos na produção de bens futuros (em vez de serem utilizados para consumo atual) que de outra forma teriam sido. A rotundância de toda a estrutura de produção é alongada. A fim de completar todos os projetos de investimento que agora estão em curso, mais tempo é necessário do que requerido para completar aqueles que começaram antes da expansão do crédito. Todos os bens que teriam sido criados sem expansão do crédito devem ser produzidos; E também, aqueles que são adicionados recentemente. Para que isso seja possível, no entanto, mais capital é necessário. A maior quantidade de bens futuros só pode ser produzida com êxito se poupanças adicionais fornecem para um fundo de meios de sustento suficientemente grande fazer uma conexão, e levar os trabalhadores através, com o tempo de espera mais longo. Mas, por suposição, nenhum aumento como essa tomou lugar na poupança. A menor taxa de juros não é o resultado de uma maior oferta de bens de capital. A taxa social de preferência de tempo não mudou nada. Isso é apenas o resultado de dinheiro falso entrando na economia através do mercado de crédito. Segue-se logicamente que isso deve ser considerado impossível de completar com êxito todos os projetos de investimento em curso após uma expansão de crédito devido à falta sistemática de capital verdadeiro. Projetos vão ter que ser liquidados a fim de encurtar a estrutura geral de produção e reajustá-lo para uma inalterada taxa de preferência de tempo social e a proporção correspondente verdadeira de investimento/consumo.[^21].

[^19]: No papel de governo como destruidor da formação de riquezas, veja em particular Murray N. Rothbard, *Poder e Mercado* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Uma Teoria de Socialismo e Capitalismo* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989); idem, “A Economia da Sociologia e Tributação,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* (1990); supra cap. 2.

[^20]: Veja em particular Rothbard, *O Mistério da Atividade Bancária*; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Atividade Bancária, Estado-Nação, e Política Internacional,” *Revisão da Economia Austríaca* 4 (1990); supra cap. 3; iden, “Marxismo e Análise da Classe Austríaca,” *Jornal dos Estudos Libertários* 9, no. 2 (1990); supra cap. 4; iden, “Integração Econômica Européia e a UME,” *Jornal da Economia Austríaca* (1989).

[^21]: Sobre a teoria do ciclo de negócios, veja as contribuições originais de Mises em sua *Teoria do Dinheiro e do Crédito*, parte III, cap. 5; sua primeira versão elaborada é *Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik* (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928), a sua tradução em inglês não apareceu até 1978 em Ludwig von Mises, *Sobre a Manipulação do Dinheiro e do Crédito* (Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.: Free Market Books, 1978); F.A. Hayek, *Teoria Monetária e o Ciclo de Troca* (New York: A.M. Kelley, 1966); iden, *Preços e Produção* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1967); Os trabalhos de Hayek foram primeiramente publicados em 1929, resp. l93l; é interessante notar que Hayek, que recebeu o prêmio Nobel em 1974, ano da morte de Mises, por suas contribuições para a teoria do ciclo de negócios de Mises-Hayek, obviamente não representa as conquistas de Mises quanto ao desenvolvimento dessa teoria: Em seu *Preço e Produção* de 1931, a primeira apresentação da teoria do ciclo de negócios austríacos aparece em inglês, ele reconhece a anterior reivindicação por fama de Mises. Ainda, mesmo que ele cite o trabalho de Mises de 1928 mencionado acima, falsamente afirma que as contribuições de Mises à teoria estavam essencialmente confinadas a algumas observações em seu trabalho original de 1912; veja o cap. 3 fn. 1 em *Preços e Produção*; Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion*; Lionel Robbins, *A Grande Depressão* (Freeport, N.Y.: Books for Libraries Press, 1971); Rothbard, *A Grande Depressão Americana*; Ludwig von Mises, et al., *A Teoria Austríaca do Ciclo de Trocas e Outros Ensaios* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1983); Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung*, cap. 3; Roger Garrison, “A Teoria do Ciclo de Troca Hayekiano: Uma Reavaliação” *Jornal Cato* 6, no. 2 (1986); iden, “O Ciclo de Negócios da Teoria Austríaca na Luz da Macroeconomia Moderna,” *Revisão da Economia Austríaca* 3 (1988).

Estes movimentos cíclicos não podem nem serem evitados por esperá-los (de acordo com o lema "um ciclo antecipado é um ciclo evitado"): Eles são a consequência praxeologicamente necessária de crédito adicional falsificado sendo empregado com sucesso. Once this is the case, a boom-bust cycle is inevitable, regardless of what actors correctly or incorrectly believe or expect. The cycle is induced by a monetary change, but it takes effect in the realm of “real” phenomena and will be a “real” cycle no matter what beliefs people happen to hold.[^22]

[^22]: See also Roger Garrison, “‘Rational Expectations’ Offers Nothing That’s Both New and True,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* 6, no. 1 (1985); idem, “The Austrian Theory of the Business Cycle in Light of Modern Macroeconomics” esp. pp. 19–23. See also the critique of psychological—as opposed to praxeological—business cycle theories below.

Nor can it be realistically expected that the inevitable cyclical movements resulting from an expansion of credit will ever come to a halt: So long as an extra-market institution like government is in control of money, a permanent series of cyclical movements will mark the process of economic development. For through the creation of fraudulent credit, a government can engender a smooth and highly inconspicuous income and wealth redistribution in its own favor. There is no reason (short of angelic assumptions) to suppose that it would ever deliberately stop using this magic wand merely because credit expansion has the “unfortunate” side-effect of business cycles.
