En reconnaissance de cette corruption influence sur l'opinion publique, les états deviennent de plus en plus engagés dans les politiques de redistribution. La part des dépenses publiques pour les dépenses civiles par rapport aux dépenses militaires et pure gouvernement de consommation augmente. Le dernier dépenses peuvent encore augmenter de façon constante en termes absolus, et ils ont en effet fait pratiquement partout, à ce jour, mais ils perdent de l'importance partout par rapport à des dépenses allouées à redistributionist mesures.[^41]

Selon les conditions particulières de l'opinion publique, tels redistributionist habituellement, les politiques simultanément supposons que l'un des deux formulaires et souvent, comme dans le cas de la Prusse à la fois: d'une part la forme de *Sozialpolitik*, des soi-disant réformes de la sécurité sociale, impliquant généralement une redistribution des revenus à partir de “nantis” de la part des producteurs pour les “démunis”, et d'autre part celui de l'entreprise cartelizations et règlements, en général, ce qui implique une redistribution de productif “démunis” ou “pas-encore-haves” les “déjà-nantis”. Avec l'introduction d'un *Sozialpolitik* un appel est lancé à égalitaire, de sentiments et d'une partie substantielle de celui-ci peut être endommagé dans l'acceptation de l'état de l'exploitation en échange de l'état de l'application de la loi de “justice sociale”. Avec l'introduction d'une politique de l'entreprise cartellisation et le règlement de l'appel à conservateur sentiments, en particulier parmi les bourgeois de l'établissement, et il peut être amené à accepter l'état de non contractuelle crédits en échange de son engagement à la préservation du statu quo. Égalitaire, le socialisme et le conservatisme sont ainsi transformés en étatiste idéologies. Ils sont en concurrence les uns avec les autres dans le sens qu'ils préconisent un peu différents modèles de redistribution, mais de compétition, les efforts convergent et s'intégrer dans le soutien conjoint de l'étatisme et de la redistribution étatique.

Le deuxième ajustement structurel d'aide à la restauration de la propriété privée, l'éthique est un changement dans les constitutions des états. En réponse au défi de la propriété privée, l'éthique, les membres de modifier leurs constitutions à partir d'un monarchiste autocratie ou d'une oligarchie aristocratique à la désormais familière type d'une soi-disant démocratie libérale.[^42] au Lieu d'être une institution qui restreint l'entrée en elle-même et/ou en particulier des postes gouvernementaux par le biais d'un système de caste ou de classe de lois, une constitution est adoptée qui, en principe, s'ouvre à chaque position du gouvernement à tout le monde et garantit l'égalité et les droits universels de la participation et de la concurrence dans la réalisation de l'état de la politique. Tout le monde—pas seulement de la “noblesse”—reçoit aujourd'hui un enjeu juridique dans l'état, et une résistance à la règle tend à réduire en conséquence. Alors que l'exploitation et l'expropriation semblait mauvais, ils semblent beaucoup moins, l'humanité étant ce qu'elle est, une fois que l'on a la chance de participer à son processus, et pendant que les ambitions de l'énergie potentielle,-adeptes les plus connus du grand public antérieurement doivent avoir été frustré, mais il est aujourd'hui institutionnalisée prise pour eux.

À payer le prix de la démocratisation de sa constitution, l'état endommage une partie importante de l'opinion publique en train de perdre de vue le fait fondamental que l'acte d'exploitation et d'expropriation est dans toutes les apparences et les conséquences le même, peu importe comment et par qui il est décidé et appliqué. Il les attire au lieu d'accepter le point de vue que de tels actes sont légitimes tant qu'on est la garantie d'un dire sur eux quelque part le long de la ligne et pourrait en quelque sorte, quelque part, participer à la sélection de l'état du personnel.[^43]

Cette corruption fonction de la démocratisation comme un stimulus pour la résurgence du pouvoir de l'état a été décrit avec une grande justesse par Bertrand de Jouvenel:

> À partir du douzième au dix-huitième siècle autorité gouvernementale n'a cessé d'augmenter. Le processus a été compris par tous ceux qui ont vu ce qui se passe; il a remué dans incessant de protestation et de réaction violente. Dans les derniers temps, sa croissance s'est poursuivie à un rythme accéléré, et son extension a apporté une extension correspondante de guerre. Et maintenant, nous ne comprenons plus le processus, nous n'avons plus de de protestation, nous n'avons plus réagir. La mise au repos de la nôtre est une chose nouvelle, pour qui le Pouvoir a remercier l'écran de fumée, dans lequel il a enveloppé lui-même. Autrefois, il pourrait être vu, se manifeste dans la personne du roi, qui n'a pas déclinons être le maître qu'il était, et chez qui les passions humaines ont été perceptibles. Maintenant, masquée dans l'anonymat, il prétend ne pas avoir d'existence propre, et d'être, mais l'impersonnel et sans passion instrument de la volonté générale. Mais c'est clairement une fiction.... Aujourd'hui comme toujours, le Pouvoir est dans les mains d'un groupe d'hommes qui ont le contrôle de la puissance de la maison.... Tout ce qui a changé, c'est qu'il est maintenant facile pour les citoyens de changer le personnel des principaux détenteurs du Pouvoir. Vu d'un certain angle, ce qui fragilise le Pouvoir, parce que les testaments que le contrôle de la société, la vie peut, à la société du plaisir, être remplacés par d'autres volontés, dans lequel il se sent le plus en confiance. Mais, en ouvrant la perspective de la Puissance à tous les ambitieux talents, cet accord prévoit l'extension de la Puissance beaucoup plus facile. En vertu de l' *de l'ancien régime*, de la société en mouvement des esprits, qui avaient, comme ils l'ont su, aucune chance de la part du Pouvoir, ont été prompts à dénoncer le moindre empiètement. Maintenant, d'un autre côté, quand tout le monde est potentiellement un ministre, pas un est intéressé pour couper la fonction à laquelle il aspire un jour lui-même, ou de mettre du sable dans une machine qui il a des moyens de les utiliser lui-même lorsque son tour arrive. C'est donc qu'il y a dans les cercles politiques une société moderne, une grande complicité dans l'extension de la Puissance.[^44]

Les deux autres ajustements effectués par l'état en vue de surmonter son point le plus bas de la popularité et de l'augmentation de sa taille actuelle ont à voir avec des relations interétatiques. Pour une chose, comme expliqué précédemment et vient de le mentionner à nouveau par de Jouvenel, les états qua monopolistique exploiteurs ont tendance à être dans l'interstate la guerre. Avec leur système interne de l'exploitation de puissance faible, le désir de compenser ces pertes par l'expansion extérieure augmente. Cependant, ce désir est frustré par un manque de soutien interne. Le soutien est créé grâce à une politique de redistribution, régulation industrielle, et de la démocratisation. (En fait, les états qui ne sont pas adopter ces mesures sont liés à perdre dans toute la longue durée de la guerre!) C'est ce soutien qui est utilisé comme un tremplin pour la réalisation de l'état expansionniste désirs.

This newfound support takes advantage of the fact that redistribution, regulation, and democratization imply a greater tangible identification of the population with a specific state and thus almost automatically lead to an increase in protectionist if not open antagonistic attitudes toward “outsiders” and that in particular state-privileged producers are by nature hostile to “foreign” competition. This support is transformed by the state and its intellectual bodyguards into a frenzy of nationalism and provides the intellectual framework for the integration of socialist-egalitarian, conservative, and democratic sentiments.[^45]

Backed by such nationalism, states begin on their expansionist course. For more than a century an almost uninterrupted series of wars and imperialist expeditions set in, each one more brutal and destructive than the previous one, with always greater involvement of the noncombative population, culminating in World War I and II but not ending with this. In the name of the socialist, conservative, or democratic nation, and by means of warfare, states have expanded their territories to sizes compared to which even the Roman Empire appears insignificant, and have actually wiped out or brought under foreign rule a steadily increasing number of culturally distinct nations.[^46]

However, not only external expansion of state power is brought about by the ideology of nationalism. War as the natural outgrowth of nationalism is also the means of strengthening the state’s internal powers of exploitation and expropriation. Each war is also an internal emergency situation, and an emergency requires and seems to justify the acceptance of the state’s increasing its control over its own population. Such increased control gained through the creation of emergencies is reduced during peacetime, but it never sinks back to its pre-war levels. Rather, each successfully ended war (and only successful governments can survive) is used by the government and its intellectuals to propagate the idea that it was only because of nationalistic vigilance and expanded governmental powers that the “foreign aggressors” were crushed and one’s own country saved, and that this successful recipe must then be retained in order to be prepared for the next emergency. Led by the just proven “dominant” nationalism, each successful war ends with the attainment of a new peacetime high of governmental controls and thereby further strengthens a government’s appetite for implementing the next winnable international emergency.[^47]

Each new period of peace means a higher level of governmental interference as compared with the previous one: internally in the form of increased restrictions on the range of choices that private property owners are allowed to make regarding their own property; and externally, as regards foreign relations, in the form of higher trade barriers and of increasingly severe restrictions on population movements (most notably on emigration and immigration). Not the least because it is based on increased discrimination against foreigners and foreign trade, any such peace contains the increased risk of the next international conflict, or pressures the affected governments into negotiating bi- or multilateral interstate-agreements aimed at cartelizing their respective power structures and thereby jointly exploiting and expropriating each other’s populations.[^48]

Finally, the fourth adjustment is made necessary by the other three, and again because of the ongoing process of interstate competition, crises, and warfare. It is less of the state’s own making than are redistribution, democratization, and war-making—just as it is not of its own making that there *is* interstate-competition at all. Rather, in fashionable Hayekian terminology, it is the unintended consequence of the fact that short of one state’s domination of the entire world (which is, of course, every state’s dream!) the continued existence of other states keeps exerting a significant constraint on each state’s size and structure.

Whether intended or unintended, this structural adjustment must also be noted if one wishes to fully understand the development that has led to the present world of statism. It is also only by mentioning this adjustment that the question why it is specifically the *tax*-state that has risen to world dominance is finally answered.

It is easy enough to explain how through a series of nationalistic wars during the nineteenth and twentieth century the states of Western Europe and North America could come to dominate the rest of the world and leave their imprint upon it. Notwithstanding the presently booming cultural relativism, the reason for this is the simple fact that these states were the outgrowth of societies with a superior intellectual tradition—that of Western rationalism—with its central ideas of individual freedom and private property, and that this tradition had laid the foundation for the creation of economic wealth far exceeding that existing anywhere else. Because they parasitically drew on such superior economic wealth, it is not at all surprising that these states were then able to battle all others victoriously.

It is also obvious why with the remarkable exception of a number of Pacific countries most of these defeated and reconstituted non-Western states have to this day utterly failed to significantly improve their international stature or even match that of the Western nation states, and have in particular failed to do so after having reached political independence from Western imperialism. With no endogenous tradition of rationalism and liberalism to speak of, such states naturally felt inclined to imitate or adopt the “victorious” ideological imports of socialism, conservatism, democratism, and nationalism, the very ideologies to which these countries’ intellectual elite had been exposed almost exclusively during their studies at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, London, Paris, Berlin, Harvard, and Columbia. As a matter of course, a brew of such each-and-all statist ideologies, unconstrained by a significant tradition of private property ethic, spells economic disaster, and such a fact more or less rules out any prominent role in international politics.[^49]

Yet what—and it is the answer to this that is somewhat less obvious—if the Western states fight each other? What determines the success in these conflicts, and what is bound to cause defeat?

Naturally, redistribution, democratization, and nationalism cannot be cited again here, for assumedly these states have already adopted such policies in order to regain internal strength and prepare for interstate warfare in the first place. Rather, just as it is the relatively stronger tradition of private property ethic that is responsible for these states’ dominance over the non-Western world, so, *ceteris paribus*, is a relatively more liberal policy responsible for their long run success in the struggle for survival among the Western states themselves. Among them, those states which have adjusted their internal redistributionist policies so as to decrease the importance of a conservatively minded policy of economic regulations relative to that of socialistically inclined policy of taxation tend to outstrip their competitors in the arena of international politics.

Regulations through which states either compel or prohibit certain exchanges between two or more private persons as well as acts of taxation are invasions of private property rights. In pursuing both types of redistributionist policies, the states’ representatives increase their own income at the expense of a corresponding income reduction for someone else. However, while by no means less destructive of productive output than taxation, regulations have the peculiar characteristic of requiring the state’s control over economic resources in order to become enforceable without simultaneously increasing the resources at its disposal. In practice, this is to say that regulations require the state’s command over and expenditure of taxes, yet regulations produce no monetary income for the state but only income in the form of the satisfaction of pure power lust (as when A, for no material gains of his own, outlaws that B and C engage in mutually beneficial trade with each other). On the other hand, taxation and a redistribution of tax revenue according to the principle “from Peter to Paul” increases the economic means at a government’s disposal at least by its own “handling-charge” for the act of redistribution but may produce no other satisfaction (apart from the increased appreciation by the Pauls) than that of actually possessing certain economic resources and being able to expend them according to its own whims.[^50]

Clearly, interstate conflicts and war require economic means, and even more resources the more frequent and longer-lasting such events are. In fact, those states which control more ample economic resources expendable on a war-effort will *ceteris paribus* tend to be victorious. Hence, since a policy of taxation, and taxation without regulation, yields a higher monetary return to the state than a policy of regulation, and of taxation cum regulation, states must willy-nilly move in the direction of a comparatively deregulated economy and a comparatively pure tax-state in order to avoid international defeat.

It is this relative advantage in international politics of the tax-state over the regulatory state that explains the rise of the U.S. to the rank of the world’s foremost imperial power.[^51] It also explains the defeat of such highly regulatory states as Nazi-Germany and Fascist-Italy, the relative weakness of the Soviet Union and its allies as compared to the NATO-alliance, and the recent simultaneous moves toward economic deregulation and increased levels of imperialist aggression of the Reagan and, to a lesser extent, the Thatcher governments.

This concludes my praxeologically informed sociological account of the evolution of the present statist world and the rise, in particular, of the modern tax-state. Based on such an understanding let me end with just a few brief remarks of how it is possible to overcome the tax-state.

It cannot be fought by a simple boycott, as could a private business, because an institution devoted to the business of expropriating and exploiting does not respect the negative verdict revealed by boycotts. It also cannot simply be fought by countering its aggression with defensive violence because the state’s aggression is supported by public opinion. Thus, overcoming it depends on a change in public opinion. The private property ethic—the idea that private property is a just institution and the only means of creating economic prosperity, and the view of the state as an outcast institution that is destructive of wealth formation, must be revived and must again inspire people’s minds and hearts. With the rampant statist ideologies of nationalism, democratism, and redistributionism (of either the socialist or the conservative kind), this may sometimes appear hopeless. However, ideas have changed in the past and can change again in the future. In fact, ideas can change instantaneously.[^52] Moreover, the idea of private property has one decisive attraction: it, and only it, is a true reflection of man’s nature as a rational being.[^53]

[^41]: On this trend see Webber and Wildavsky, *A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World*, pp. 588f.; on redistribution in general see also de Jasay, *The State*, chap. 4.

[^42]: On this trend see Reinhard Bendix, *Kings or People* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978).

[^43]: On the social psychology of democracy see Gaetano Mosca, *The Ruling Class* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1939); H.L. Mencken, *Notes on Democracy* (New York: Knopf, 1926); on the tendency of democratic rule to “degenerate” to oligarchic rule see Robert Michels, *Zur Soziologie des Parteiwesens* (Stuttgart: Kroener, 1957).

[^44]: Bertrand de Jouvenel, *On Power* (New York: Viking Press, 1949), pp. 9–10.

[^45]: On nationalism, imperialism, colonialism—and their incompatibility with classical liberalism—see Ludwig von Mises, *Liberalism* (San Francisco: Cobden Press, 1985); idem, *Nation, State and Economy* (New York: New York University Press, l983); Joseph A. Schumpeter, *Imperialism and Social Classes* (New York: World Publishing, 1955); Lance E. Davis and Robert A. Huttenback, *Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: The Political Economy of British Imperialism 1860–1912* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).

[^46]: See Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*; Johnson, *Modern Times*.

[^47]: This process is the central topic of Higgs, *Crisis and Leviathan*.

[^48]: The most vicious of such agreements is very likely that of restricting entry for noncriminal persons wanting to immigrate into a given territory—and the chance for those living in this territory to offer employment to them—and of extraditing them back to their home-countries.

[^49]: On the problem of the so-called Third World see Peter T. Bauer and B.S. Yamey, *The Economics of Under-Developed Countries* (London: Nisbet and Co., 1957); P.T. Bauer, *Dissent on Development* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972); idem, *Equality, The Third World and Economic Delusion* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981); Stanislav Andreski, *The African Predicament* (New York: Atherton Press, 1969); idem, *Parasitism and Subversion* (New York: Pantheon, 1966).

[^50]: On regulation and taxation as different forms of aggression against private property and their economics and sociology see Rothbard, *Power and Market*; Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*.

[^51]: On the imperialistic foreign policy of, in particular, the U.S. see Krippendorff, *Staat und Krieg*, chap. III, p. 1; and Rothbard, *For a New Liberty*, chap. 14.

[^52]: See on this also Etienne de la Boétie, *The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude*, ed. Murray N. Rothbard (New York: Free Life Editions, 1975).

> Resolve to serve no more, and you are at once freed. I do not ask that you place bands upon the tyrant to topple him over, but simply that you support him no longer; then you will behold him, like a great colossus whose pedestals have been pulled away, fall of his own weight and break into pieces. (pp. 52–53)

[^53]: On the—a prioristic—rational justification of the private property ethic see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “From the Economics of Laissez Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism”, in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); idem, “The Justice of Economic Efficiency”, *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter, 1988); infra chaps. 8 and 9.
