Troisièmement, toute personne qui a vu de l'état des postes de police et des tribunaux, pour ne pas mentionner les prisons, sait combien il est vrai que les facteurs de production utilisés pour nous fournir de telles sécurité sont surexploitées, mal entretenu et sale.Car personne à l'aide de ces facteurs de production est le propriétaire (personne ne peut les vendre et en privé approprié les recettes provenant de la vente) et les pertes (et les gains) de la valeur incarnée dans la capitale utilisés sont donc socialisé, tout le monde aura tendance à augmenter son revenu résultant de l'utilisation des facteurs au détriment de pertes de valeur du capital. Par conséquent, le coût marginal sera de plus en plus tendance à dépasser la valeur du produit marginal, et une utilisation excessive de capital résultat. Et si, dans un cas exceptionnel, ce n'est pas de l'être et une utilisation excessive ne doit pas être évident, alors ceci n'a été possible, à des coûts relativement plus élevés que ceux d'un semblable dans le secteur privé.[^26]

Sans doute, tous ces problèmes inhérents à un système de monopole de la sécurité de production devrait être résolu assez rapidement une fois qu'une demande pour des services de sécurité a été rencontré par un marché concurrentiel, avec son totalement différent structure des incitations pour les producteurs. Ce n'est pas à dire qu'un “parfait” solution au problème de la sécurité. Il y aurait encore des vols et des meurtres; et pas tout le butin doit être récupérée ni tous les assassins pris. Mais en termes de consommation des évaluations de la situation devrait s'améliorer dans la mesure où la nature de l'homme permettront de l'améliorer. Tout d'abord, tant qu'il y a un système concurrentiel (c'est à dire, tant que producteurs de services de sécurité dépendent de volontaire, les achats, la plupart de ce qui a probablement prendre la forme de service et les contrats d'assurance convenue à l'avance de toute réelle “événement” de l'insécurité ou de l'agression), aucun producteur ne pourrait augmenter ses revenus sans l'amélioration des services ou de la qualité du produit, tel que perçu par les consommateurs. En outre, tous les services de sécurité producteurs pris ensemble ne pouvait pas soutenir l'importance de leur secteur d'activité particulier, à moins que, pour des raisons que ce soit, les consommateurs, en effet, a commencé l'évaluation de la sécurité plus fortement que les autres marchandises, de sorte que la production de sécurité ne pourrait jamais se faire au détriment de la non - ou une réduction de la production de, disons, le fromage, comme une concurrence pour le secteur privé. En outre, les producteurs de services de sécurité auraient à diversifier leurs offres à un degré considérable, car une grande diversification de la demande pour les produits de sécurité parmi des millions et des millions de consommateurs existe. Directement dépendante volontaire de soutien des consommateurs, ils seraient immédiatement être mal financièrement s'ils n'ont pas de répondre adéquatement aux consommateurs divers veut ou modifier en veut. Ainsi, chaque consommateur aurait une influence directe, quoique de petite taille, sur la production de biens apparaissant ou disparaissant du marché de la sécurité. Au lieu de proposer un uniforme de sécurité “paquet” à tout le monde, une caractéristique de la politique de production, une multitude de forfaits de services apparaissent sur le marché. Ils seraient adaptés aux différents besoins de sécurité des personnes différentes, en tenant compte des différents métiers, les différents comportements à risque, des besoins différents en matière de protection et d'assurance, et de différents lieux géographiques et des contraintes de temps.

Mais cela est loin de tout. En plus de la diversification, le contenu et la qualité des produits, l'amélioration de trop. Non seulement le traitement des consommateurs par les employés de la sécurité aux entreprises d'améliorer immédiatement, le “je-pouvais-soins-de moins en moins” de l'attitude, de l'arbitraire et même de la brutalité, de la négligence et de la lenteur de la police et du système judiciaire disparaîtrait. Depuis, les policiers et les juges dépendent volontaire de soutien des consommateurs, toutes les instances de la maltraitance des consommateurs, de l'impolitesse ou de l'incompétence pourrait leur coûter leur emploi. En outre, la particularité que le règlement des différends entre un client et son partenaire d'affaires est toujours confiée à ce dernier jugement, serait presque certainement disparaître dans les livres, et les conflits d'arbitrage par des parties indépendantes qui allait devenir le standard offert par les producteurs de la sécurité.Le plus important, afin d'attirer et de fidéliser les clients les producteurs de ces services aurait à offrir des contrats qui permettrait au consommateur de savoir ce qu'il achète et lui permettre de lever un valide, intersubjectively vérifiable plainte si le rendement réel de la sécurité producteur ne respecte pas le contrat. Plus précisément, dans la mesure où ils ne sont pas individualisés des contrats de service lorsque le paiement est effectué par un client pour couvrir ses risques et périls exclusivement, mais sont plutôt des contrats d'assurance qui nécessitent la mise en commun ses propres risques avec ceux d'autres personnes, contrairement à la présente étatiste la pratique de ces contrats le plus certainement ne ferait délibérément intégré de redistribution régime de favoriser un groupe au détriment d'un autre. Sinon, si quelqu'un avait le sentiment que le contrat proposé de lui de lui de payer pour d'autres personnes particulier des besoins et des risques—facteurs de possible de l'insécurité, qui est, qu'il n'a pas perçu comme applicables à son propre cas, il serait tout simplement refuser de le signer ou de cesser ses paiements.

Pourtant, quand tout cela est dit, la question sera inévitablement à la surface. “Ce ne serait pas un système concurrentiel de la sécurité de la production nécessairement provoquer un conflit social, le chaos et l'anarchie?” Plusieurs réponses peuvent être apportées à cette question. Tout d'abord, il convient de noter qu'une telle impression serait en aucun cas être en conformité avec l'historique des données empiriques. Les systèmes de concurrence tribunaux ont existé à différentes endroits (par exemple, dans l'ancienne Irlande, ou à l'époque de la Ligue Hanséatique) avant l'arrivée de l'état-nation moderne, et aussi loin que nous savons qu'ils ont bien fonctionné.[^27] Jugé par le inexistants taux de criminalité (crime par habitant), la police privée dans le " Wild West (qui par ailleurs n'était pas aussi sauvage que certains films implique) ont été relativement plus de succès que ceux d'aujourd'hui soutenu par l'état de la police).[^28] Et en tournant contemporaine, de l'expérience et des exemples, des millions et des millions de contrats internationaux existent, même maintenant—les contrats du commerce et des déplacements—et il semble certainement être exagéré de dire, par exemple, qu'il y a plus de fraude, plus de crimes, plus de rupture de contrat il y a que dans les relations familiales. Et cela, il convient de noter, sans qu'il y ait un gros monopole de la sécurité producteur et artisan. Enfin, il n'est pas à oublier que même maintenant dans un grand nombre de pays, il existe divers de la sécurité privée producteurs aux côtés de l'état: les enquêteurs privés, de l'assurance des détectives privés et des arbitres. Leur travail semble confirmer la thèse qu'ils sont de plus en plus de succès dans la résolution des conflits sociaux que leurs établissements publics.

However, this historical evidence is very much subject to dispute, in particular regarding whether any general information can be derived from it. Yet there are systematic reasons, too, why the fear expressed by the question is not well-founded. Paradoxical as it may seem, establishing a competitive system of security producers implies erecting an institutionalized incentive structure to produce an order of law and law-enforcement that embodies the highest possible degree of consensus regarding the question of conflict resolution. Such a structure will tend to generate less rather than more social unrest and conflict than would occur under monopolistic auspices.[^29] In order to understand this paradox, it is necessary to take a closer look at the only typical situation that concerns the skeptic and that allows him to believe in the superior virtue of a monopolistically organized order of security production: when a conflict arises between A and B, both are insured by different companies and the companies cannot come to an immediate agreement regarding the validity of the conflicting claims brought forward by their respective clients. (No problem would exist if such an agreement were reached or if both clients were insured by one and the same company—at least the problem then would not be different in any way from that emerging under a statist monopoly.) Would not such a situation always result in a shoot-out? This is highly unlikely. First, any violent battle between companies would be costly and risky, in particular if these companies had reached a respectable size (which would be important for them to have in order to appear as effective guarantors of security to their prospective clients in the first place). More importantly, under a competitive system with each company dependent on the continuation of voluntary consumer payments, any battle would have to be deliberately supported by each and every client of both companies. If there were only one person who withdrew his payments because he was not convinced a battle was necessary in the particular conflict at hand, there would be immediate economic pressure on the company to look for a peaceful solution to the conflict.[^30] Hence any competitive producer of security would be extremely cautious about engaging in violent measures in order to resolve conflicts. Rather, to the extent that it is peaceful conflict resolution that consumers want, each and every security producer would go to great lengths to provide it to its clients and to establish in advance, for everyone to know, to what arbitration process it would be willing to submit itself and its clients in case of a disagreement over the evaluation of conflicting claims. And as such a scheme could appear to the clients of different firms to be working only if there were agreement among them regarding such arbitrational measures, a system of law governing relations between companies that would be universally acceptable to the clients of all of the competing security producers would naturally evolve. Moreover, the economic pressure to generate rules representing a consensus on how conflicts should be handled is even more farreaching. Under a competitive system, the independent arbitrators who would be entrusted with the task of finding peaceful solutions to conflicts would be dependent on the continued support of the two disputing companies insofar as the companies could and would select different judges if either one of them were sufficiently dissatisfied with the outcome of the arbitration work. Thus, these judges would be under pressure to find solutions to the problems handed over to them that, this time not with respect to the procedural aspects of law but its content, would be acceptable to all of the clients of the firms involved.[^31] Otherwise one or all of the companies might lose customers, thus inducing those firms to turn to different arbitrators the next time they are in need of one.[^32]

But wouldn’t it be possible under a competitive system for a security producing firm to become an outlaw company—a firm, that is, which, supported by its own clients, started aggressing against others? There is certainly no way to deny that this might be possible, though again it must be emphasized that here one is in the realm of empirical social science and no one could know such a thing with certainty. And yet the tacit implication that the possibility that a security firm could become an outlaw company somehow indicates a severe deficiency in the philosophy and economics of a pure capitalist social order is fallacious.[^33]

First, it should be recalled that any social system, a statist-socialist order no less than a pure market economy, is dependent for its continued existence on public opinion and that a given state of public opinion at all times delimits what can or cannot occur as well as what is more or less likely to occur. The current state of public opinion in West Germany, for instance, makes it highly unlikely or even impossible that a statist-socialist system of the current Soviet type could be imposed on the West German public. The lack of public support for such a system would doom it to failure and make it collapse. It is even more unlikely that any attempt to impose a Soviet-type order could ever hope to succeed among Americans, given American public opinion. Hence, in order for us to see the problem of outlaw companies correctly, the above question should be phrased as follows: How likely is it that any such event would occur in a given society with its specific state of public opinion? Formulated in this way, it is clear that the answer would have to be different for different societies. For some, characterized by socialist ideas deeply entrenched in the public, there would be a greater likelihood of the reemergence of aggressor companies, and for other societies there would be a much smaller chance of this happening. But then, would the prospect of a competitive system of security production in any given case be better or worse than that of the continuation of a statist system? Let us look, for instance, at the present-day United States. Assume that by a legislative act the state had abolished its right to provide security with tax funds and a competitive system of security production was introduced. Given the state of public opinion, how likely then would it be that outlaw producers would spring up, and what if they did? Evidently, the answer would depend on the reactions of the public to this changed situation. Thus, the first reply to those challenging the idea of a private market for security would have to be: What about you? What would your reaction be? Does your fear of outlaw companies mean that you would then go out and engage in trade with a security producer that aggressed against other people and their property, and would you continue supporting it if it did? Certainly the critic would be much muted by this counterattack. But more important than this is the systematic challenge implied in this personal counterattack. Evidently, the described change in the situation would imply a change in the cost-benefit structure that everyone would face once he had to make his decisions. Before the introduction of a competitive system of security production, it had been legal to participate in and support (state) aggression. Now such an activity would be illegal. Hence, given one’s conscience, which makes each decision appear more or less costly (i.e., more or less in harmony with one’s own principles of correct behavior), support for a firm engaging in the exploitation of people unwilling to deliberately support its actions would be more costly than before. Given this fact, it must be assumed that the number of people (including even those who otherwise would have readily lent their support to the state) who would now spend their money to support a firm committed to honest business would rise wherever this social experiment was tried. In contrast, the number of people still committed to a policy of exploitation—of gaining at the expense of others—would fall. How drastic this effect would be would of course depend on the state of public opinion. In the example at hand—the United States, where the natural theory of property is extremely widespread and accepted as a private ethic, the libertarian philosophy being essentially the ideology on which the country was founded and that led it to the height it reached[^34]—the effect would naturally be particularly pronounced. Accordingly, security producing firms committed to the philosophy of protecting and enforcing libertarian law would attract the greatest bulk of public support and financial assistance. And while it may be true that some people, and among them especially those who have profited from the old order, might continue their support of a policy of aggression, it is very unlikely that they would be sufficient in number and financial strength to succeed in doing so. Rather, the likely outcome would be that the honest companies would develop the strength needed—alone or in a combined effort and supported in this effort by their own voluntary customers—to check any such emergence of outlaw producers and destroy them wherever and whenever they came into existence.[^35]

[^26]: Sums up Molinari, *Production of Security,* pp. 13–14,

> If … the consumer is not free to buy security wherever he pleases, you forthwith see open up a large profession dedicated to arbitrariness and bad management. Justice becomes slow and costly, the police vexatious, individual liberty is no longer respected, the price of security is abusively inflated and inequitably apportioned, according to the power and influence of this or that class of consumers.

[^27]: See the literature cited in note 22; also Bruno Leoni, *Freedom and the Law* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1961); Joseph Peden, “Property Rights in Celtic Irish Law,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977).

[^28]: See Terry L. Anderson and Peter J. Hill, “The American Experiment in Anarcho-Capitalism: The *Not* So Wild, Wild West,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 1 (1980).

[^29]: On the following, see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1986), chap. 5.

[^30]: Contrast this with the state’s policy of engaging in battles without having everyone’s deliberate support because it has the right to tax people; and ask yourself if the risk of war would be lower or higher if one had the right to stop paying taxes as soon as one had the feeling that the states’ handling of foreign affairs was not to one’s liking.

[^31]: And it may be noted here again that norms that incorporate the highest possible degrees of consensus are, of course, those that are presupposed by argumentation and whose acceptance makes consensus on anything at all possible, as indicated above.

[^32]: Again, contrast this with state-employed judges who, because they are paid from taxes and so are relatively independent of consumer satisfaction, can pass judgments that are clearly not acceptable as fair by everyone; and ask yourself if the risk of not finding the truth in a given case would be lower or higher if one had the possibility of exerting economic pressure whenever one had the feeling that a judge who one day might have to adjudicate in one’s own case had not been sufficiently careful in assembling and judging the facts of a case, or simply was an outright crook.

[^33]: See on the following in particular Rothbard, *For A New Liberty*, pp. 233ff.

[^34]: See Bernard Bailyn, *The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); Jackson Turner Main, *The Anti-Federalists: Critics of the Constitution* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1961); Murray N. Rothbard, *Conceived in Liberty* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1975–1979).

[^35]: Naturally, insurance companies would assume a particularly important role in checking the emergence of outlaw companies. Note Morris and Linda Tannehill (*The Market of Liberty*, pp. 110–11):

> Insurance companies, a very important sector of any totally free economy, would have a special incentive to dissociate themselves from any aggressor and, in addition, to bring all their considerable business influence to bear against him. *Aggressive violence causes value loss*, and the insurance industry would suffer the major cost in most such value losses. An unrestrained aggressor is a walking liability, and no insurance company, however remotely removed from his original aggression, would wish to sustain the risk that he might aggress against one of its own clients next. Besides, aggressors and those who associate with them are more likely to be involved in situations of violence and are, thus, bad insurance risks. An insurance company would probably refuse coverage to such people out of a foresighted desire to minimize any future losses which their aggression might cause. But even if the company were not motivated by such foresight, it would still be forced to rate their premiums up drastically or cancel their coverage altogether in order to avoid carrying the extra risk invoked in their inclination to violence. In a competitive economy, no insurance company could afford to continue covering aggressors and those who had dealings with aggressors and simply pass the cost on to its honest customers; it would soon lose these customers to more reputable firms which could afford to charge less for their insurance coverage.
