### On the Indefensibility of Welfare Rights

[^0]: Reply to David Conway, “A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism”, *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter/Spring, 1990).

David Conway claims that my argument intending to show the unrestricted validity of the homesteading principle, i.e., the first-use-first-own rule regarding unowned, nature-given resources, is flawed, and that he can demonstrate the defensibility of welfare rights. I remain unconvinced and contend that it is his counterargument which is faulty.

While I have no quarrel with his presentation of my argument, I will first briefly restate my proof. Second, I will point out the central errors in his reply. Third, I wish to offer an explanation for Conway’s rejection of my argument as resulting from a rather common misconception regarding the logic of ethical reasoning.

Whether or not one has any rights, and, if any, which ones, can only be decided in the course of argumentation. It is impossible to deny the truth of this without falling into a contradiction. Arguing requires a person’s exclusive control (ownership) over scarce resources (one’s brain, vocal cords, etc.). Denying this would again merely prove the point. Further, a person must have acquired this ownership simply by virtue of the fact that he began using these resources before anyone else had done so; otherwise, he could never say or argue anything to begin with. Thus, anyone denying the validity of the homesteading principle at least with respect to *some* resources would contradict the content of his proposition through his very act of proposition making. So far, it appears, Conway would agree. But he would impose limitations on the range of objects that may legitimately be homesteaded. Unfortunately for Conway’s case, however, once exclusive control over some homesteaded means is admitted as justified, it becomes impossible to justify any restrictions in the homesteading process—except for a self-imposed, voluntary one—without thereby running into contradictions. For if the proponent of such a restriction were consistent, he could have justified control only over some, albeit limited, scarce resources which he would not be allowed to employ for additional homesteading. Yet obviously, he could not then interfere with another’s extended homesteading simply because of his own lack of means to do anything about this. And if he did interfere, he would thereby (inconsistently) extend his ownership claims beyond his own justly homesteaded resources. Moreover, in order to justify his interference he would have to invoke a principle of property acquisition incompatible with the homesteading principle: He would have to claim (inconsistently) that a person who extends his homesteading, and who does so in accordance with a principle that no one can argue to be generally invalid, is, or at least can be, an aggressor (even though in doing so this person could not possibly be said to have taken anything away from anyone because he would have merely appropriated *previously unowned resources*, i.e., things that no one up to that point had even recognized as scarce and which anyone else could have appropriated as well if only he had recognized their scarcity earlier, including anyone such as Conway, who was concerned about the fate of late-comers and wanted to preserve these resources for their later benefit). Furthermore, that a person who interferes with such an action and who does so in accordance with a principle that no one could possibly argue to be generally valid is, or at least can be, acting legitimately (even though he would always take something away from someone whose appropriations had occurred at no one’s expense).

The central error in Conway’s rejection of this argument is his refusal to acknowledge the logical incompatibility of his idea of welfare rights on the one hand—the notion that one can have enforceable claims against homesteaders—and of the homesteading principle on the other. Either the first idea is right or the second is. However, the first cannot be said to be right because in order for anyone to say so, the second one must be presupposed as valid. There can be no such thing as a right to life, then, in Conway’s sense of a right to having one’s life sustained by others. There can only be each person’s right to own his physical body, and everything homesteaded with its help, and to engage in mutually beneficial exchanges with others. Suppose, for instance, that I am terminally ill and the only way for me to survive is to have my brain short-circuited with Conway’s. Does he have the right to refuse? I think so, and I am sure that he thinks so, too. But he cannot have this right on welfare grounds (assuming that his life would not be threatened by such an operation), but only on the basis of the homesteading principle as the precondition of one’s existence as an independently reasoning and arguing physical being. Further, his claim that welfare rights are “every bit as objective” as those implied by mixing one’s labor with scarce resources (contrary to my thesis that the former are subjective, arbitrary, verbal, derived out of thin air) is fallacious. Through homesteading an objective link between a *particular person* and a *particular resource* is created. But how in the world can one say that my need can give rise to a claim regarding any specific resource or resource owner X, rather than Y, or Z, if I had not homesteaded or produced either one?! Not only is neediness incapable of objective identification or measurement: Who determines who is or is not needy? Everyone for himself? But what if I happened to disagree with someone’s self-assessment? People have died from love-sickness. Do they have a right to a lover-conscript? People have survived by eating grass, bark, rats, roaches, or others’ garbage. Are there no needy people then so long as there is enough grass or garbage to eat? If not, why not? For how long would the support for the needy have to last? Forever? And what about the rights of the supporters who would thereby become permanently enslaved to the needy? Or what if my support for the needy caused me to become needy myself, or somehow increased my own future needs? Would I still have to continue to support them? And how much work can I expect the destitute to perform in return for my support, given the fact that one is not dealing here with a mutually beneficial employment relation or voluntary charity to begin with? As much as the needy feel is appropriate?

Moreover, even if all these difficulties were overcome, more are lying in the wings because need does not connect the needy with any resource or resource owner in particular, yet it must invariably be particular resources that provide relief. The needy may be needy without any fault of their own, but the non-needy may be non-needy without any fault of theirs, too. So how can the needy claim support from me rather than from you? Surely that would be utterly unfair toward me in particular! In fact, either the needy can have a claim against no one in particular, which is to say they have no claim whatsoever; or else their claim would have to be directed equally against each one of the world’s non-needy.

Yet how can the needy possibly enforce such a claim? After all, they lack resources. For this to be possible, an all-resourceful, worldwide operating agency would be required. The owners of such an agency obviously would have to be classified as among the non-needy and could hence have no direct claim against anyone. Supposedly, only need creates such claims. In fact, this agency would have to be considered one of the foremost debtors to the needy, and it could only legitimately act against other non-needy if it had previously voluntarily paid *its* share of welfare debts *and* the needy had contractually entrusted it with such an enforcement task. Hence, the welfare problem would have to wait for a solution until this institution arrived. So far it has not arrived, and there is nothing to indicate that it will arrive in the near future. Even if it did, welfare rights would still be incompatible with the homesteading rule as an indisputably valid, axiomatic principle.

The explanation for Conway’s refusal to accept the homesteading ethic lies in a misconception regarding the nature of ethical theory. Instead of recognizing ethics as a logical theory, deductively derived from incontestable axioms (akin to praxeology), Conway implicitly shares a popular, empiricist-intuitionist (or gut-feeling) approach toward ethics. Accordingly, an ethical theory is *tested* against moral experience such that if the theory yields conclusions at variance with one’s moral intuitions, it should be regarded as falsified. However, this view is entirely mistaken and, much like in economics, the role of theory and experience in ethics is almost precisely the opposite: It is the very function of ethical theory to provide a rational justification for our moral intuitions, or to show why they have no such basis and make us reconsider and revise our intuitive reactions. This is not to say that intuitions can never play a role in the building of ethical theory. In fact, counterintuitive theoretical conclusions may well *indicate* a theoretical error. But if after one’s theoretical reexamination errors are found neither in one’s axioms nor in one’s deductions, then it is one’s intuitions that must go, not one’s theory.

In fact, what strikes Conway as a counterintuitive implication of the homesteading ethic, and then leads him to reject it, can easily be interpreted quite differently. It is true, as Conway says, that this ethic would allow for the possibility of the entire world’s being homesteaded. What about newcomers in this situation who own nothing but their physical bodies? Cannot the homesteaders restrict access to their property for these newcomers and would this not be intolerable? I fail to see why. (Empirically, of course, the problem does not exist: if it were not for governments restricting access to unowned land, there would still be plenty of empty land around!) These newcomers normally come into existence somewhere as children born to parents who are owners or renters of land (if they came from Mars, and no one wanted them here, so what?; they assumed a risk in coming, and if they now have to return, tough luck!). If the parents do not provide for the newcomers, they are free to search the world over for employers, sellers, or charitable contributors, and a society ruled by the homesteading ethic would be, as Conway admits, the most prosperous one possible! If they still could not find *anyone* willing to employ, support, or trade with them, why not ask what’s wrong with *them*, instead of Conway’s feeling sorry for them? Apparently *they* must be intolerably unpleasant fellows and should shape up, or they deserve no other treatment. Such, in fact, would be my own intuitive reaction.