### Ìṣòro ẹkọ nipa idaniloju ti agbegbe lori ilana gbogbo ti ihuwasi ìṣe ẹda eniyan

Ni imọ sayensi tún tún gbogbo nkan dabi pe o jẹ onisoro. O jẹ alejo ni ilana ibile ti imọ ọlọ́gbọ́n ; o ya awọn eyan lẹ́nu ati pe wọn ko mọ bi wọn ṣe le ṣe àkọsílẹ̀ rẹ ati lati fi si ayé rẹ ti o yẹ. Sugbọn lọwọ miiran wọn ni gbagbọ pe àkójọ ọrọ aje ninu àkọsílẹ̀ imọ oye ko nilo àtúnṣe tabi imugboroja ti isagbeye àpapọ̀. Wọn ṣe akiyesi pe iwe ilana ero wọn pẹ. Ti ọ̀rọ̀ aje ko ba wọ inu rẹ, ẹbi naa le sinmi pẹlu itọju ti ko ni idaniloju ti awọn olùkọ́ aje ti lọ si awọn ìṣòro wọn.

O jẹ ede aiyede alailoye ti ìtumọ̀ ti itakuroso nipasẹ ẹkọ, dópin ọmú, ati iwasi ọlọ́gbọ́n ti ọrọ aje lati pa wọn kuro gẹgẹbi awọn onímọ̀ iwe ti o jiyan bi ojogbon oniye. O jẹ imọye àṣìṣe ni gbogbo agbaye pe ti awọn ọmọwe olusori ba sọ ọrọ asan nípa ilana ọna ti o yẹ julọ, ọrọ aje ti ara rẹ, yiyatọ si awọn ibalopo ìṣòro wonyii, o lọ ni jẹjẹ lọ́nà rẹ. Ninu *Methodenstreit* laarin awọn akowe ọrọ aje ilu Austrian ati ile iwe Prussian Historical, ti ara ẹni "olùsọ igbimọ ọgbọn ti ile Hohenzollern," ati ninu awọn ijiroro laarin ile iwe ti John Bates Clark ati ijọba ti Amerika ti o pọju si ibere iru ọna ti o jẹ julọ. Ọrọ ododo ni awọn ìpilẹ̀ṣẹ̀ ẹkọ atinudawa ti imọran ijinle ti ihuwasi ẹda eniyan ati isalaye arosọ. Bíbéèrè lati ìpilẹ̀ṣẹ̀ eto ẹkọ ti ironu atileyin jẹ ojiji ati lati imọran ti o jẹ wo ti o mọ si imọ sayensi--yàtọ̀ si imọ ọlọ́gbọ́n ati ẹkọ iwe àpapọ̀--nìkan ni igbimọ adayeba imọ sayensi ati itan aye, ọpọlọpọ awọn on kọ̀wé gbiyanju lati kọ iye ati iwulo ti ilana ẹkọ aye. Itan akoole niyanju lati ri rọ́pò nipasẹ itan aje ; ilana òtítọ́ ododo ṣe iseduro ti iyipada ti imọ oni ààlà ti o yẹ ki o gba ẹtọ imọran ati ilana ti awọn ọna ero Newtonian. Sugbọn awọn ile iwe yii pinnu papọ ni ijaduro ti gbogbo awọn aseyori ti ero aje. Ko seese fún àwọn ọmọwe ọrọ aje lati panu mọ ni oju gbogbo awọn ipalara yii.

Ìyàtọ̀ ti idajọ osunwọn yii ni ọrọ ti isowo ti fere pelepele nipasẹ iseduro pupọ ti gbogbo agbaye. Lati igba ti awọn eyan ti ni ero, sísọ, ati huwa ti mu isokan ati aisewu ti ọna imọran ologbon ti ọkan eniyan gẹgẹbi òtítọ́ ti ko ni ìdiwọ̀. Gbogbo ibeere ijinle sayensi da le lori asayan yii. Ní awọn ijiroro nipa awọn ihuwasi iwa ti ẹkọ aje, awọn akọ̀wé, fún igba àkọ́kọ́ ni ìṣẹ̀dá eniyan, ti kọ imọran yii naa. Marxism fihan pe ironu eniyan pinnu si ẹgbẹ́ àpapọ̀ ti o n ko. Gbogbo ẹgbẹ́ àwùjọ has a logic of its own. The product of thought cannot be anything else than an "ideological disguise" of the selfish class interests of the thinker. It is the task of a "sociology of knowledge" to unmask philosophies and scientific theories and to expose their "ideological" emptiness. Economics is a "bourgeois" makeshift, the economists are "sycophants" of capital. Only the classless society of the socialist utopia will substitute truth for "ideological" lies.

This polylogism was later taught in various other forms also. Historicism asserts that the logical structure of human thought and action is liable to change in the course of historical evolution. Racial polylogism assign to each race a logic of its own. Finally there is irrationalism, contending that reason as such is not fit to elucidate the irrational forces that determine human behavior.

Such doctrines go far beyond the limits of economics. They question not only economics and praxeology but all other human knowledge and human reasoning in general. They refer to mathematics and physics as well as to economics. It seems therefore that the task of refuting them does not fall to any single branch of knowledge but to epistemology and philosophy. This furnishes apparent justification for the attitude of those economists who quietly continue their studies without bothering about epistemological problems and the objections raised by polylogism and irrationalism. The physicist does not mind if someone stigmatizes his theories as bourgeois, Western or Jewish; in the same way the economist should ignore detraction and slander. He should let the dogs bark and pay no heed to their yelping. It is seemly for him to remember Spinoza's dictum: Sane sicut lux se ipsam et tenebras manifestat, sic veritas norma sui et falsi est.

However, the situation is not quite the same with regard to economics as it is with mathematics and the natural sciences. Polylogism and irrationalism attack praxeology and economics. Although they formulate their statements in a general way to refer to all branches of knowledge, it is the sciences of human action that they really have in view. They say that it is an illusion to believe that scientific research can achieve results valid for people of all eras, races, and social classes, and they take pleasure in disparaging certain physical and biological theories as bourgeois or Western, But if the solution of practical problems requires the application of these stigmatized doctrines, they forget their criticism. The technology of Soviet Russia utilizes without scruple all the results of bourgeois physics, chemistry, and biology just as if they were valid for all classes. The Nazi engineers and physicians did not disdain to utilize the theories, discoveries, and inventions of people of "inferior" races and nations. The behavior of people of all races, nations, religions, linguistic groups, and social classes clearly proves that they do not endorse the doctrines of polylogism and irrationalism as far as logic, mathematics, and the natural sciences are concerned.

But it is quite different with praxeology and economics. The main motive for the development of the doctrines of polylogism, historicism, and irrationalism was to provide a justification for disregarding the teachings of economics in the determination of economic policies. The socialists, racists, nationalists, and etatists failed in their endeavors to refute the theories of the economists and to demonstrate the correctness of their own spurious doctrines. It was precisely this frustration that prompted them to negate the logical and epistemological principles upon which all human reasoning both in mundane activities and in scientific research is founded.

It is not permissible to dispose of these objections merely on the ground of the political motives which inspired them. No scientist is entitled to assume beforehand that a disapprobation of his theories must be unfounded because his critics are imbued by passion and party bias. He is bound to reply to every censure without any regard to its underlying motives or its background. It is no less impermissible to keep silent in the face of the often asserted opinion that the theorems of economics are valid only under hypothetical assumptions never realized in life and that they are therefore useless for the mental grasp of reality. It is strange that some schools seem to approve of this opinion and nonetheless quietly proceed to draw their curves and to formulate their equations. They do not bother about the meaning of their reasoning and about its reference to the world of real life and action.

This is, of course, an untenable attitude. The first task of every scientific inquiry is the exhaustive description and definition of all conditions and assumptions under which its various statements claim validity. It is a mistake to set up physics as a model and pattern for economic research. But those committed to this fallacy should have learned one thing at least: that no physicist ever believed that the clarification of some of the assumptions and conditions of physical theorems is outside the scope of physical research. The main question that economics is bound to answer is what the relation of its statements is to the reality of human action whose mental grasp is the objective of economic studies.

It therefore devolves upon economics to deal thoroughly with the assertion that its teachings are valid only for the capitalistic system of the shortlived and already vanished liberal period of Western civilization. It is incumbent upon no branch of learning other than economics to examine all the objections raised from various points of view against the usefulness of the statements of economic theory for the elucidation of the problems of human action. The system of economic thought must be built up in such a way that it is proof against any criticism on the part of irrationalism, historicism, panphysicalism, behaviorism, and all varieties of polylogism. It is an intolerable state of affairs that while new arguments are daily advanced to demonstrate the absurdity and futility of the endeavors of economics, the economists pretend to ignore all this.

It is no longer enough to deal with the economic problems within the traditional framework. It is necessary to build the theory of catallactics upon the solid foundation of a general theory of human action, praxeology. This procedure will not only secure it against many fallacious criticisms but clarify many problems hitherto not even adequately seen, still less satisfactorily solved. There is, especially, the fundamental problem of economic calculation.
