### 

After this reconstruction of the classical, and especially the Austrian theory of employment, money, interest, and the capitalist process, I will now turn to Keynes and his “new” theory. Before the backdrop of our explanation of the old one it shall be easy to recognize Keynes’s “new” *General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money* as fundamentally flawed and the Keynesian revolution as one of the twentieth century’s foremost intellectual scandals.[^23]

#### Employment

Keynes sets out with a false theory of employment. Contrary to the classical view, he claims that there can be involuntary unemployment on the free market; and, further, that a market can reach a stable equilibrium with persistent involuntary unemployment. And in claiming such market failures to be possible he contends to have uncovered the ultimate economic rationale for interfering in the operations of markets by extra-market forces.

Since the free market is defined in terms of homesteaded or produced private property and the voluntariness of all interactions between private property owners, it should be clear that what Keynes claims to show is roughly equivalent to a squaring of the circle.

Keynes begins with the false statement that the classical theory assumed “that there is no such thing as involuntary unemployment in the strict sense.”[^24] In fact, it assumed no such thing. Classical theory assumed that involuntary unemployment is logically-praxeologically impossible so long as a free market is in operation. That involuntary unemployment, indeed any amount of it, can exist in the presence of an extra-market institution, minimum wage laws, etc., has never been seriously doubted.

After this falsehood, Keynes then proceeds to give his definition of involuntary unemployment:

> Men are involuntarily unemployed if, in the event of a small rise in the price of wage-goods [i.e., consumer goods] relative to the money wage, both the aggregate supply of labor willing to work for the current money-wage and the aggregate demand for it at that wage would be greater than the existing volume of employment.[^25]

Translated into plain English, what Keynes is saying in his typical obfuscating way is that men are involuntarily unemployed if an increase in prices relative to wage rates leads to more employment.[^26] Yet such a change in relative prices is logically equivalent to a fall in real wage rates; and a fall in real wages can be brought about on the unhampered market by wage earners at any time they so desire, simply by accepting lower nominal wage rates with commodity prices remaining where they are. If laborers decide not to do this, there is nothing involuntary in all this. Given their reservation demand for labor, they choose to supply that amount of labor which is actually supplied. Nor would the classification of this as voluntary unemployment-employment change a bit, if at another point in time with lower real wage rates the amount of employment were to increase. By virtue of logic, such an outcome can only be brought about if in the meantime laborers have increased their relative evaluation of a given wage rate versus their labor reservation demand (otherwise, if no such change had occurred, employment would decrease instead of increasing). The fact, however, that one can change one’s mind from one point in time to the next hardly implies that one’s earlier choice was involuntary, as Keynes would have it. Of course, one can define one’s terms any way one wishes, and in a truly Orwellian fashion one may even choose to call voluntary involuntary and involuntary voluntary. Yet through this method anything under the sun can be “proven,” while in fact nothing of substance whatsoever is shown. Keynes’s way of demonstrating the possibility of involuntary unemployment is a verbal nonsense proof which leaves entirely unaffected the fact that no such thing as involuntary employment, in the usual sense of this term, can ever exist on the unhampered market.

As if this were not enough, Keynes tops it off by claiming that involuntary unemployment is conceivable even in the never-never land of equilibrium. Indeed, he criticizes his earlier *Treatise on Money* by saying, “I had not then understood that, in certain conditions, the system could be in equilibrium with less than full employment.”[^27] Yet equilibrium is *defined* as a situation in which changes in values, technology, and resources no longer occur where all actions are completely adjusted to a final constellation of data; and where all factors of production then, including labor, are employed to the fullest extent possible (given these unchanging data) and are repeatedly and endlessly employed in the same constant production pattern. Hence, as H. Hazlitt has remarked, the discovery of an unemployment equilibrium by Keynes, in his *General Theory*, is like the discovery of a triangular circle—a contradiction in terms.[^28]

#### Money

Having thrown out logic in his treatment of employment and unemployment, Keynes, in his discussion of money, then throws out economic reasoning by advancing the claim that money and monetary changes (can) have a systematic effect on employment income, and interest.

Given the fact that “money” appears in the title of the *General Theory,* Keynes’s positive theory of money is amazingly brief and undeveloped. Brevity, of course, can be a virtue. In the case of Keynes, it offers the opportunity to pinpoint rather easily his elementary mistakes. For Keynes, “*the importance of money essentially flows from its being a link between the present and the future*.”[^29] “Money in its significant attributes is, above all, a subtle device for linking the present and the future.”[^30] That this is false follows from the fact that in the never-never land of equilibrium no money would exist,[^31] yet even under equilibrium conditions there would still be a present and a future, and both would still be linked. Rather than functioning as a link to the future, money serves as a medium of exchange; a role that is inextricably tied to the uncertainty of the future.[^32] Action, which invariably begins in the present and is aimed at some future goal, more or less distant in time from the point of beginning, constitutes the real link between the present and the future. And it is time preference as a universal category of action that gives this link between the present and the future its specific shape. Money, contrary to interest, no more relates the present to the future than do other economic phenomena, such as nonmonetary goods. Their present value, too, reflects anticipations regarding the future, no more and no less so than does money.

From this first misconception regarding the nature of money, all other misconceptions flow automatically. Being defined as a subtle link between present and future, the demand for money (its supply being given), which Keynes, in line with his general inclination of misinterpreting logical-praxeological categories as psychological ones, terms “liquidity preference” or “propensity to hoard,”[^33] is said to be functionally related to the rate of interest (and vice versa).[^34] “Interest,” writes Keynes, “is the reward of not-hoarding,”[^35] “the reward for parting with liquidity,”[^36] which makes liquidity preference in turn the unwillingness to invest in interest-bearing assets. That this is false becomes obvious as soon as one asks the question “What, then, about prices?” The quantity of beer, for instance, that can be bought for a definite sum of money is obviously no less a reward for parting with liquidity than is the interest rate, which would make the demand for money then the unwillingness to buy beer as much as it is an unwillingness to invest.[^37] Formulated in general terms, the demand for money is the unwillingness to buy or rent nonmoney, including interest-bearing assets (land, labor, and/or capital goods, or future goods) *and* non-interest-bearing assets (consumer or present goods). To recognize this is to recognize that the demand for money has nothing to do with investment or with consumption; nor has it anything to do with the ratio of investment-to-consumption expenditures, or the spread between input and output prices (the discount of higher order or future goods versus lower order or present goods). Increases or decreases in the demand for money, other things being equal, lower or raise the overall level of money prices, but real consumption and investment, as well as the real consumption-investment proportion remain unaffected; and such being the case, employment and social income remain unchanged as well. The demand for money determines the spending/cash balance proportion. The investment/consumption proportion, pace Keynes, is an entirely different and unrelated matter. It is solely determined by time-preference.[^38]

The same conclusion is reached if changes in the supply of money (liquidity preference being given) are considered. Keynes claims that an increase in the supply of money, other things being equal, can have a positive effect on employment. He writes, “so long as there is unemployment, employment will change in the same proportion as the quantity of money.”[^39] Yet this is not only a highly curious pronouncement because it *assumes* the existence of unemployed resources instead of *explaining* why such a thing should possibly occur—for, obviously, a resource can be unemployed only because it is either not recognized as scarce at all and thus has no value whatsoever, or because its owner voluntarily prices it out of the market and its unemployment then is no problem that would call for a solution.[^40]

Even if one were to waive this criticism, the statement would still be fallacious. For if other things were indeed equal, then the additional supply of money would simply lead to increased overall prices and simultaneous and proportional increased wage rates, and nothing would change at all. If, contrary to this, employment should increase, this is only possible if wage rates do not rise along with, and to the same extent as, other prices. However, other things then can no longer be said to be equal, because real wage rates would be lowered, and employment can only rise while real wages fall if the relative evaluation of employment versus self-employment (i.e., unemployment) is assumed to have changed. Yet if this is assumed, no increase in the money supply would have been required. The same result (increased employment) could also have been brought about by laborers accepting lower nominal wage rates.

#### Interest

With logic and economic theory thrown out of the window, in his discussion of the interest phenomenon Keynes abandons reason and common sense entirely.

According to Keynes, since money has a systematic impact on employment, income, and interest, interest, in turn—quite consistently, for that matter—must be conceived of as a purely monetary phenomenon.[^41] I need not explain the elementary fallacy of this view. Suffice it to say here again that money would disappear in equilibrium, but interest would not, which demonstrates that interest must be considered a real, not a monetary phenomenon.

Moreover, Keynes, in talking about “functional relationships” and “mutual determination” of variables instead of causal, unidirectional relations, becomes entangled in inescapable contradictions as regards his theory of interest.[^42] As has been explained above, on the one hand Keynes thinks of liquidity preference (and the supply of money) as *determining* the interest rate, such that an increased demand for money, for instance, would raise the interest rate (and an increased supply of money would lower it) and that this then will reduce investment “whilst a decline in the rate of interest may be expected, *ceteris paribus*, to increase the volume of investment.”[^43] On the other hand, characterizing the interest rate as “the reward for parting with liquidity,” he contends that the demand for money is *determined* by the interest rate, such that a fall in the interest rate, for instance, would increase one’s demand for cash (and also, one should add, one’s propensity to consume) and hence lead to *reduced* investment. Obviously, however, a lower interest rate can hardly both increase and decrease investment at the same time. Something must be wrong here.

Keynes, however, combines falsehood and contradiction into one of the most fantastic conspiracy theories ever heard of.

Since interest, according to Keynes, is a purely monetary phenomenon, it is only natural to assume that it can be manipulated at will through monetary policy (provided, of course, one is not restricted in this by the existence of a 100-percent-reserve commodity money standard such as the gold standard).[^44] “There is,” writes Keynes, “no special virtue in the pre-existing rate of interest.”[^45] In fact, if the supply of money is sufficiently increased, the interest rate supposedly can be brought down to zero. Keynes recognizes that this would imply a superabundance of capital goods, and one would think that this realization should have given him cause to reconsider. Not so! On the contrary, in all seriousness he tells us

> that a properly run community equipped with modern technical resources, of which the population is not increasing rapidly, ought to be able to bring down the marginal efficiency of capital in equilibrium approximately to zero within a single generation.[^46]

It is “comparatively easy to make capital goods so abundant that the marginal efficiency of capital is zero (and) this may be the most sensible way of gradually getting rid of many of the objectional features of capitalism.”[^47] “There are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of capital.”[^48] Rather, it is “possible for communal saving through the agency of the State to be maintained at a level where it ceases to be scarce.”[^49]

Don’t worry that this would imply that no maintenance or replacement of capital would be needed any longer (for, if this were the case, capital goods would still be scarce and hence command a price), and capital goods instead would have to be “free goods” in the same sense in which air is usually “free.” Don’t worry that if capital goods were no longer scarce, then consumer goods could no longer be scarce either (for, if they were, the means employed to produce them would have to be scarce, too). And don’t worry that in this Garden of Eden, which Keynes promises to establish within one generation (why so long?!), there would no longer be any use for money. For, as he informs us, “I am myself impressed by the great social advantages of increasing the stock of capital until it ceases to be scarce.”[^50] Who would dare disagree with this![^51]

Yet more is to come. Because, as Keynes sees it, there are some obstacles on the path toward paradise. For one thing, the gold standard stands in the way, because it makes the expansion of credit impossible (or difficult at least, in that a credit expansion would lead to an outflow of gold and a subsequent economic contraction). Hence Keynes’s repeated polemics against this institution.[^52] Furthermore, there is the just explained problem of his own making: that a lower interest rate supposedly increases and decreases investment simultaneously. And it is to get out of this logical mess that Keynes comes up with a conspiracy theory: For, while the interest rate must be reduced to zero so as to eliminate scarcity, as we were just told, the lower the interest rate the lower also the reward for parting with liquidity. The lower the interest rate, that is to say, the lower the incentive for capitalists to invest, because their profits will be reduced accordingly. Thus, they will try to undermine, and conspire against, any attempt to resurrect the Garden of Eden.

Driven by “animal spirits,”[^53] “gambling instincts,”[^54] and “addicted to the money-making passion,”[^55] they will conspire so “that capital has to be kept scarce enough.”[^56] “The acuteness and peculiarity of our contemporary problem arises, therefore,” writes Keynes,

> out of the possibility that the average rate of interest which will allow a reasonable average level of employment [and of social income] is one so unacceptable to wealth owners that it cannot be readily established merely by manipulating the quantity of money.[^57]

In fact,

> the most stable, and least easily shifted, element in our contemporary economy has been hitherto, and may prove to be in the future, the minimum rate of interest acceptable to the generality of wealth owners.[^58]

Fortunately, we are informed, there is a way out of this predicament; through “the euthanasia of the rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital.”[^59] And surely they deserve such a fate. For “the business world” is ruled by an “uncontrollable and disobedient psychology,”[^60] and private investment markets are

> under the influence of purchasers largely ignorant of what they are buying and of speculators who are more concerned with forecasting the next shift of market sentiment than with a reasonable estimate of the future yield of capital assets.[^61]

As a matter of fact, don’t we all know that “there is no clear evidence from experience that the investment policy which is socially advantageous coincides with that which is most profitable;”[^62] indeed, that the decisions of private investors depend largely on “the nerves and hysteria and even the digestions and reactions to the weather,”[^63] rather than on rational calculation?! Thus, concludes Keynes, “the duty of ordering the current volume of investment cannot safely be left in private hands.”[^64] Instead, to turn the present misery into a land of milk and honey, “a somewhat comprehensive socialization of investment will prove the only means.”[^65]

> The State, which is in a position to calculate the marginal efficiency of capital-goods on long views and on the basis of the general social advantage [must take] an ever greater responsibility for directly organizing investment.[^66]

I trust that none of this requires further comment. It is too obvious that these are the outpourings of someone who deserves to be called anything, except an economist.

[^23]: For pro-Keynesian literature see in particular Seymour P. Harris, ed., *The New Economics* (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1947); Alvin Hansen, *A Guide to Keynes* (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1953); for anti-Keynesian literature see in particular Henry Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics”* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1959); idem, ed., *The Critics of Keynesian Economics* (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1983).

[^24]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 21; also pp. 6, 15.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 15\. Keynes at this point promises an alternative definition to be given on p. 26; revealingly, no such definition appears there or anywhere else in the book!

[^26]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 30.

[^27]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 242–43; also p. 28.

[^28]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 52.

[^29]: Keynes, *General Theory*, p. 293.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 294.

[^31]: Mises explains:

> Let us assume that there is only gold money and only one central bank. With the successive progress toward the state of an evenly rotating economy all individuals and firms restrict step by step their holding of cash and the quantities of gold thus released flow into nonmonetary—industrial—employment. When the equilibrium of the evenly rotating economy is finally reached, there are no more cash holdings; no more gold is used for monetary purposes. The individuals and firms own claims against the central bank, the maturity of each part of which precisely corresponds to the amount they will need on the respective dates for the settlement of their obligations. The central bank does not need any reserves as the total sum of the daily payments of its customers exactly equals the total sum of withdrawals. All transactions can in fact be effected through transfer in the bank’s books without any recourse to cash. Thus the “money” of this system is not a medium of exchange; it is not money at all; it is merely a *numéraire*, an ethereal and undetermined unit of accounting of that vague and indefinable character which the fancy of some economists and the errors of many laymen mistakenly have attributed to money. (*Human Action*, p. 249)

[^32]: Keynes recognizes that money also has something to do with uncertainty. The fundamental mistake in his theory of money pointed out here, however, surfaces again when he relates money not to uncertainty as such, but, more specifically, to uncertainty of interest rates. “The necessary condition” [for the existence of money] he writes, “is the existence of uncertainty as to the future rate of interest” (*General Theory*, p. 168; also p. 169). See also the following discussion.

[^33]: Ibid., p. 174.

[^34]: On the absurd implications of the assumption of functional—rather than causal—relations, see the discussion below.

[^35]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 174.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 167.

[^37]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” pp. 188f.

[^38]: See also Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 40–41; Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 521–23.

[^39]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 296.

[^40]: See also W.H. Hutt, *The Theory of Idle Resources* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1977).

[^41]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 173; see also his laudatory remarks on mercantilist economics, and in particular, Silvio Gesell, as precursors of this view on pp. 341, 355.

[^42]: See on this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 687–89.

[^43]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 173.

[^44]: See also below.

[^45]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 328.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 220.

[^47]: Ibid., p. 221.

[^48]: lbid., p. 376.

[^49]: Ibid., p. 376.

[^50]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 325.

[^51]: See also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the* “*New Economics,*” pp. 231–35\. What about the seemingly obvious objection, that the expansion of monetary credit through which Keynes wants to bring about the reduction of the interest rate to zero is nothing but an expansion of paper, and that the problem of scarcity is a matter of “real” goods, which can only be overcome through “genuine savings”? To this he has the following funny answer in *The General Theory*:

> The notion that the creation of credit by the banking system allows investment to take place to which “no genuine saving” corresponds, i.e., the idea that saving and investment … can differ from one another, is to be explained, I think, by an optical illusion. (p. 81)
> 
> [T]he savings which result from this decision are just as genuine as any other savings. No one can be compelled to own the additional money corresponding to the new bank-credit unless he deliberately prefers to hold more money rather than some other form of wealth. (p. 83)
> 
> The new money is not “forced” on anyone. (p. 328)

As Henry Hazlitt remarks,

> [o]n the same reasoning we can create any amount of new “savings” we wish overnight, simply by printing that amount of new paper money, because *somebody* will necessarily hold that new paper money! (*The Failure of the “New Economics,”* p. 227)

[^52]: See Keynes, *The General Theory,* pp. 129ff., 336ff., 348f. On Keynes’s role in the actual destruction of the gold standard see Henry Hazlitt, *From Bretton Woods to World Inflation* (Chicago: Regnery, 1984).

[^53]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 161.

[^54]: Ibid., p. 157.

[^55]: Ibid., p. 374.

[^56]: Ibid., p. 217.

[^57]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 308–09.

[^58]: Ibid., p. 309, and he adds, in a footnote, “The nineteenth-century saying, quoted by Bagehot, that ‘John Bull’ can stand many things, but he cannot stand 2 per cent.” On Keynes’s conspiracy theory see also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* pp. 3, 16–18.

[^59]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 376, also p. 221.

[^60]: Ibid., p. 317.

[^61]: Ibid., p. 316.

[^62]: Ibid., p. 157.

[^63]: Ibid., p. 162.

[^64]: Ibid., p. 320.

[^65]: Ibid., p. 378.

[^66]: Ibid., p. 164.