## Against Fiduciary Media

Casi todos los economistas austríacos contemporáneos comparten el oponerse a un sistema bancario central y su apoyo a un sistema bancario libre y competitivo. Sin embargo, se ha dado un debate acalorado acerca del significado preciso de “sistema bancario libre y competitivo”. El “sistema bancario libre” requiere un sistema de 100% reservas de depósito, o permite e incluso requiere un sistema de reservas fraccionales? En un artículo reciente que apareció en el *Revisión de Economía Austríaca*, George A. Selgin y Lawrence White, los más importantes defensores contemporáneos austríacos del “sistema bancario libre”, se han comprometido a intentar responder sistemáticamente los numerosos críticos y defensores austríacos del sistema bancario de 100% reservas de depósitos. [^1]

Contra los cargos hechos por sus críticos, Selgin y White tratan de establecer dos tesis. Primero, aseguran demostrar que la práctica del sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales, es decir, la emisión de media fiduciaria, no constituye un fraude sino que está justificada por el principio de libertad contractual, y en particular, sostienen que el sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales está de acuerdo con teoría contractual de transferencia de título tal como la ha desarrollado Murray N. Rothbard (siendo que Rothbard, quien afirma que el sistema de reservas fraccionales es fraudulente, debe haber fallado en sostener su propia teoría). Segundo, intentan demostrar que la creación de media fiduciaria no deriva necesariamente en en ineficiencias económicas y desorganización sino que podría en realidad ayudar a prevenir una crisis que de otra manera sería inevitable y por ende mejorar el desarrollo económico. A continuación, demostraremos que ni la aseveración normativa central ni la aseveración positiva secundaria están establecidas.[^2]

### El Asunto del Fraude I: El Dinero, los Sustitutos del Dinero, Media Fiduciaria, y la Teoría Contractual de Transferencia de Título

A fin de resolver la cuestión de que si el sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales consituye un fraude o no, algunas conjeturas basadas en los hechos y algunas terminologías deben ser aclaradas desde el principio. Afortunadamente, existe un acuerdo casi unánime acerca de estos temas en ambos lados del debate, y por ende, podemos ser extremadamente breves. El dinero no puede originarse sino como una mercancía, tal como el oro. El oro, entonces, como el dinero es definido como “el medio de intercambio generalmente aceptable”, y como tal es especialmente caracterizado por su “suprema capacidad de ser vendido en comparación con todos los demás bienes” (ya que su “posesión lo pone a uno en posición de ser capaz de realizar cualquier compra potencial con mínimos inconvenientes).[^3] Los sustitutos del dinero, uno a la vez, son definidos como declaraciones o títulos de una cantidad específica de dinero u oro. Si los sustitutos de dinero (papel moneda) son completamente cubiertos por las reservas de dinero (oro), Mises los define como “certificados de dinero”, y nos referiremos a ellos simplemente como sustitutos de dinero. Si los sustitutos de dinero (billetes) no están respaldados por el dinero (oro), entonces serán denominados como media fiduciaria.[^4]

Basados en estas conjeturas y definiciones, ahora podemos volver a la pregunta de si la emisión de media fiduciaria constituye o no un fraude. Afortunadamente la discusión de este asunto es simplificada por el hecho de que Selgin y White acepta explícitamente la teoría contractual Rothbardiana de transferencia de título. Que la emisión de media fiduciaria es, por naturaleza, fraudulenta, tal como afirman Rothbard y Hoppe, Selgin y White encuentran

> imposible de reconciliar con la teoría contractual de Rothbard… de transferencia de título, la cual aceptamos y la cual Rothbard de otra manera usa para defender la libertad individuos que mutuamente dan su consentimiento para llevar a cabo actos capitalistas con su (legítimamente adueñada) propiedad. Rothbard define el fraude como “una falla para completar una transferencia de propiedad voluntariamente aceptada”. Los arreglos de reserva fraccional no pueden ser entonces *por naturaleza* o *ineludiblemente* fraudulentos. Si un banco en particular está cometiendo fraude al tener reservas fraccionales debe depender en los términos de los acuerdos de transferencia de títulos entre el banco y sus clientes.[^5] …
> 
> Si es o no fraudulento poseer reservas fraccionales contra la responsabilidad de un banco no depende *por sí mismo* en si es una responsabilidad de demanda o de tiempo, sino solamente en si el banco se ha malversado a sí mismo al poseer reservas al 100 por ciento. La capacidad de demanda de un título particular emitido por un banco, por ejemplo, la opción contractual de rescindir en cualquier momento, no es *por sí misma* una representación de que el banco posee el 100% de las reservas con respecto al total de los títulos demandables. Rothbard argumenta de otra manera, basado en la perspectiva de que la demanda de depósitos y notas de un banco son necesariamente “recibos de almacenamiento” y no deudas. No vemos por qué banco y cliente no pueden contractualmente acordar transformarlos en deudas y no en recibos de almacenamiento, y creemos que históricamente, han acordado eso.[^6]

While this may sound plausible at first glance, it does not withstand serious scrutiny. In fact, the quoted passage reveals that the most basic lesson concerning property and contract has been overlooked. Como Hoppe lo formuló, “dos individuos no pueden ser el propietario exclusivo de una misma cosa al mismo tiempo”.[^7] Este es un principio inmutable; es una ley de acción y naturaleza que ningún contrato puede cambiar ni invalidar. En realidad, cualquier acuerdo contractual que involucra presentar a dos individuos diferentes como dueños simultáneos de una misma cosa (o alternativamente, la misma cosa poseída por simultáneamente por más de una persona) es objetivamente falso y por ende, fraudulento.[^8] Aunque esto es precisamente lo que involucra un acuerdo de reservas fraccionales entre un banco y cliente.

Al emitir y aceptar una nota fiduciaria (a un precio rebajado necesariamente), tanto el banco como el cliente, *de hecho*, a pesar de lo que sea que puedan creer o pensar acerca de la transacción, han acordado reconocerse a sí mismos- fraudulentamente - como los dueños de una misma cosa al mismo tiempo. They have in fact contracted to create additional titles and claims to the same existing quantity of property. In issuing fiduciary notes, they do not—and cannot—bring more property into existence. Indeed, no contract whatsoever can possibly increase the existing quantity of property, but can only transfer (redistribute) existing property from one person to another. La cantidad de propiedad existente solamente puede ser aumentada a través de apropiación adicional y producción (y por ende, una cantidad aumentada puede derivar a un correspondiente número aumentado de títulos de propiedad). Pero el sistema de reservas fraccionales y la emisión de media fiduciaria, mientras no puede aumentar la cantidad de propiedad en existencia, tampoco involucra (como lo hacen todos los otros contratos) una transferencia de propiedad existente o títulos de propiedad existente, de una mano a la otra. Neither does the issue and acceptance of a fiduciary note signify a transfer of property from bank to client or vice versa. To be sure, as the result of a fiduciary issue, the distribution of assets and liabilities in the accounts of bank and client is altered. But no existing quantity of property is actually transferred from bank to client, or vice versa, and the total quantity of property in existence has remained unchanged. Rather, fiduciary media represent new and additional titles to or claims on an existing and unchanged stock of property. They are not the result and documented outcome of an additional supply of property on the part of the bank or its client. Instead, they represent an additional supply of property titles, while the supply of *property* has remained constant. It is precisely in this sense that it can be said of fiduciary media that they are created out of thin air. They are property-less titles in search of property. Esto, en y por sí mismo, constituye fraude, ya sea según la definición del término que ha hecho Rothbard, como “una falla para completar una transferencia de propiedad voluntariamente aceptada” o según la propia definición de Selgin y White como “un engaño *intencional* o *deliberado* con propósito de ganancias” Cada emisor y comprador de una nota fiduciaria (un título de dinero sin respaldo de dinero), sin importar lo que puedan pensar, es de hecho - objetivamente - llevado a cabo en una tergiversación del propósito personal de ganancia. The bank and its client have consented to misrepresent themselves as the owners of a quantity of property that they do not own and that plainly does not exist; and whenever they buy an existing quantity of property in exchange for titles to a nonexisting quantity of property, they have become invariably and inescapably guilty of an act of fraudulent appropriation.[^9]

[^1]: George Selgin and Lawrence White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media—or, We are Not Devo(lutionists), We are Misesians!” *Review of Austrian Economics* 9 no. 2 (1996): 83–107.

Curiously, in the reply to their various critics, Selgin and White selected as their central target an article by Hans-Hermann Hoppe (“How is Fiat Money Possible?—or, The Devolution of Money and Credit,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 7, no. 2 (1994): 49–74, that deals only cursorily with their position. Other Austrian critics of fractional reserve banking explicitly dealt with in Selgin and White’s article including Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988) and Jesús Huerta de Soto, “A Critical Analysis of Central Banks and Fractional-Reserve Free Banking from the Austrian Perspective,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 8, no. 2 (1995): 25–36\. Murray N. Rothbard, the most prominent critic of fractional reserve banking, is targeted only indirectly; and although several of his works are mentioned in their bibliography, Rothbard’s later writings on the subject (“The Myth of Free Banking in Scotland,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 2 [1988]: 229–57; idem, “Aurophobia: or, Free Banking on What Standard?” *Review of Austrian Economics*, 6, no. 1 [1992]: 97–108; idem, “The Present State of Austrian Economics,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* 6, no. 2 [1995]) are not mentioned. Likewise ignored entirely are the criticisms by Joseph T. Salerno (“Two Traditions in Modern Monetary Theory: John Law and A.R.J. Turgot,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* 2, no. 2/3 [1991]; idem, “The Concept of Coordination in Austrian Macroeconomics,” in *Austrian Economics: Perspectives on the Past and Prospects for the Future*, Richard Ebeling, ed. [Hillsdale, Mich.: Hillsdale College Press, 1991]; and idem, “Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 [1993]: 113–46). Selgin and White also do not address, and in this case could not have done so, the most recent and most extensive criticism of their work by Jörg Guido Hülsmann (“Free Banking and the Free Bankers,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 9, no. 1 [1996]: 3–53).

[^2]: As a doctrinal matter, Selgin and White also suggest that their view of fractional reserve banking coincides with Ludwig von Mises’s view; hence, they call themselves Misesians and claim it is the defenders of 100-percent-reserve banking who are deviationists. This claim can be rejected. In fact, Selgin (*The Theory of Free Banking: Money Supply under Competitive Note Issue* [Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988], pp. 60–63) has frankly acknowledged that Mises’s and his own views concerning fiduciary media are contradictory and White’s attempt to claim Mises as a proponent of fractional reserve free banking has been addressed by Salerno (“Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 [1993]: 113–46). Here it suffices to provide a quotation from Mises:

> The main thing is that the government should no longer be in a position to increase the quantity of money in circulation and the amount of cheque-book money not fully—i.e., 100 percent—covered by deposits paid in by the public…. No bank must be permitted to expand the total amount of its deposits subject to cheque or the balance of such deposits of any individual customer … otherwise than by receiving cash deposits … or by receiving a cheque payable by another domestic bank subject to the same limitations. This means a rigid 100 per cent reserve for all future deposits; i.e., all deposits not already in existence on the first day of the reform. (*The Theory of Money and Credit* [Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1978], pp. 438 and 48)

See also notes 11, 25, 37, 47, and 48 below.

[^3]: Lawrence H. White, *Competition and Currency* (New York: New York University Press, 1989).

[^4]: See Salerno, “Ludwig von Mises’s Monetary Theory in Light of Modern Monetary Thought,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 8, no. 1 (1994): 71–115\. Selgin and White highlight the fact that Hoppe referred to them as proponents of “partial fiat money,” but then are ultimately compelled to admit that he did in fact not misrepresent their position as advocates of fractional reserve banking based on an underlying gold standard. Their complaint amounts to no more than a dispute over semantics. We will treat it as such here, too, and will concentrate instead exclusively on substantive disagreements.

There is actually more to the charge of Selgin and White being fiat money advocates in the article under scrutiny. For, in “the mature free-banking system,” according to Selgin and White (but in contrast to the analysis of the operation of such a system given by Mises), a situation is supposed to emerge in which

> At the limit, if inter-clearinghouse settlements were made entirely with other assets (perhaps claims on a super-clearinghouse which itself holds negligible commodity money), and if the public were completely weaned from holding commodity money, the active demand for the old-fashioned money commodity would be wholly nonmonetary. (Lawrence White, *Competition and Currency* [New York: New York University Press, 1989], p. 235)

Thus, notes Salerno (“Ludwig von Mises’s Monetary Theory in Light of Modern Monetary Thought,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 8, no. 1 [1994]: 71–115, p. 76, n. 7) regarding Selgin and White’s ultimate objective, “the public would presumably finally be freed from its shackles of gold to enjoy the virtues of an invisible-hand-generated private fiat money.” Moreover, as far as semantic innovations and deviations from orthodox Misesian terminology, and hence potential sources of confusion are concerned, we have to consider Selgin and White’s own writings. For in referring to money and money substitutes as “outside and “inside” money respectively, in talking of “base money,” “basic money,” “bank money,” “high-powered” and “low-powered” money, and, yes, the gold dollar “as a substitute for bank deposits,” they display an unusual degree of semantic creativity. Moreover, in suggesting, by their selection of terms, that all of these things are somehow equally “money,” their writings actually have become a source of obfuscation. See on this Hülsmann, “Free Banking and the Free Bankers,” pp. 5ff.

[^5]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 86–87.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 87, n. 8.

[^7]: It is also “impossible that some time depositor and borrower are entitled to exclusive control over the same resources” (Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?”, p. 67).

[^8]: Even partners cannot simultaneously own the *same* thing. A and B can each own half of a household, or half the shares in it but they each own a *different* 50 percent. It is as logically impossible for them to own the same half as for two people to occupy the same space. Yes, A and B can both be in New York City at the same time, but only in different parts of it.

[^9]: Jesús Huerta de Soto (“A Critical Analysis of Central Banks,” p. 33) correctly likens the effect of fractional reserve banking to that of the so-called tragedy of the commons. Selgin and White (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 92–93, n. 12) object to de Soto’s analogy on the ground that the tragedy of the commons refers “to a particular sort of technological externality,” according to Selgin and White, involves “a physical or otherwise direct interference with someone’s consumption or production” and represents “interaction outside the market.” In contrast, write Selgin and White, the “externality from fiduciary media” is a harmless pecuniary “effect on someone’s wealth transmitted via the price system,” that is, through changes in the system of relative prices, and represents “an interdependence through the market.” Selgin and White err: an object and a title to an object are not the same thing.

In lumping money and money substitutes together under the joint title of “money,” as if they were somehow the same thing, Selgin and White fail to grasp that the issue of fiduciary media—an increase of property titles—is not the same thing as a larger supply of property and that relative price changes effected through the issue of fiduciary media are an entirely different “externality” matter than price changes effected through an increase in the supply of property. With this the fundamental distinction between property and a property title in mind, de Soto’s analogy between fractional reserve banking and the tragedy of the commons makes perfect sense. As under the scenario of a tragedy of the commons, every issue of fiduciary media—to titles in search of property—sets in motion a rush, always starting with the bank and its client, to fill these empty tickets with existing property; and in the course of this rush, invariably the first-comers will physically enrich themselves (through the appropriation of existing quantities of property) at the expense of a corresponding impoverishment of later-comers, whose quantity of existing property is physically diminished while they have been left with a larger number of property tickets.