Solo falta un único elemento importante para una reconstrucción del orden mundial del presente: dinero. Está en el interés natural de un estado el expandir su territorio militarmente; y, por lo tanto, se esperaría una tendencia con respecto a una relativa concentración de los estados. También se encuentra en el interés de un estado el activar el "imperialismo monetario" (p. ej. el extender su poder de falsificación sobre territorios mas grandes); así, una tendencia hacia una moneda valida en todo el mundo, debería ser esperada. Ambos intereses y tendencias se complementan una a otra. Por un lado, cualquier paso en la dirección de un cartel internacional de falsificación estará destinado a fallar si no es complementado por el establecimiento de una dominación militar y su jerarquía. Las presiones económicas internas y externas, eventualmente harán que el cartel reviente. Con la superioridad militar, de cualquier modo, un cartel de inflación se vuelve posible. Por otro lado, una vez que la dominación militar haya hecho el cartel posible, el estado dominante puede expandir su poder explotador sobre otros territorios sin mas guerra, y conquistar. De hecho, la cartelización internacional de falsificación permite al estado dominante perseguir, a través de medios mas sofisticados (p.ej., menos visibles) lo que la guerra y la conquista podrían no alcanzar por si solos.

En el primer paso, un estado dominante (un estado el cual podría aplastar otro estado militarmente y es percibido como capaz de hacerlo, particularmente por el gobierno dominado) usará su poder superior par impulsar una política de inflación coordinada internacionalmente. Su propio banco central define el ritmo en el proceso de falsificación, y los bancos centrales del estado dominado reciben la orden de inflar los precios, junto con el estado dominante. En términos prácticos, la moneda del estado dominante es impuesta como reserva en los bancos de los países extranjeros, y son presionados para usarlo como la base de sus propias acciones inflacionarias.

Restringido no por la demanda actual sino por la opinión publica, es relativamente fácil, para un estado dominante, completar esta meta. Las conquistas territoriales directas y la implementación directa de su propia moneda en territorios extranjeros puede ser prohibida debido al estado de la opinión nacional o internacional. Sin embargo, con el poder de destruir un gobierno extranjero especifico—incluso cuando no es suficientemente fuerte para una toma del control completa—es requerido muy poco por el estado dominante para lograr el imperialismo *monetario*.

Internamente, lo más probable es que no encuentre resistencia alguna. El mismo gobierno estará satisfecho con esta solución. Por primera vez, su propia moneda es empleada como reserva en bancos extranjeros en los cuales luego será jerarquizada junto con otras divisas internacionales, luego se vuelve posible para este comenzar, de manera muy económica, la expropiación de las propiedades de dueños extranjeros y productores de ingresos sin temer consecuencias contractivas. Similarmente, su propia élite de bancos y negocios esta lista para aceptar dicho arreglo, porque ellos, también, participar seguramente en la explotación extranjera. Los bancos en particular son entusiastas. Y el publico es ampliamente ignorante de lo que está sucediendo, o consideran la explotación menor de extranjeros menos importante que los problemas internos del pais.

Externamente, los asuntos son solo un poco mas complicados. El estado dominado le pierde recursos al dominante como consecuencia del régimen monetario. Pero ante la posibilidad de perder su control interno, naturalmente prefiere consentir un esquema que no solo le permite mantenerse en el poder, sino que realmente sigue es su propia expropiación fraudulenta de su propia población por inflar su moneda en la parte superior y de acuerdo con la creación de la moneda del país dominante. Esencialmente, por la misma razón, las élites bancarias y de negocios, como los primeros receptores de dinero falso de su estado respectivo, están dispuestas a aceptar esta solución. And the general public in the dominated territories, which through arrangement is subject to a double layer of exploitation of foreign states’ elites on top of a national state and elite, is again largely unaware of all this and fails to identify it as one important cause of its own prolonged economic dependency and relative stagnation vis-à-vis the dominant nation.

El primer paso, sin embargo, no proporciona una solución perfecta. El sistema monetario internacional está caracterizado por una moneda dominante, y una multitud de otras monedas nacionales jerarquizadas por encima, fluctuando libremente las tarifas de cambio entre distintas monedas.

Por un lado esto es menos satisfactorio para el estado dominante, gracias a que bajo estas circunstancias, se deja un amplio margen de posibilidad para su propia moneda, devaluándose ante otras, y dicho desarrollo supondría una amenaza a su propio rol como poder dominante. Para las tarifas de cambio, no está exclusivamente determinado por las políticas inflacionarias de varios bancos centrales. Ultimately and *ceteris paribus*, they are determined by purchasing power parity.[^30] E incluso si un banco central dominado voluntariamente infla la moneda junto con el banco central dominante, otros factores (como un menor nivel de impuestos y regulaciones, por ejemplo) pueden todavía hacer su moneda apreciar en contra del estado dominante.

Por otro lado, la existencia de una multitud de monedas que fluctúan libre y constantemente unas con otras es, como ha sido explicado anteriormente, disfuncional del propósito mismo del dinero. Es un sistema de trueque parcial. Esto crea un caos informacional, hace los cálculos económicos racionales imposibles, y por consiguiente conduce a ineficiencias dentro del propio sistema de producción, el cual, el estado dominante, ha dañado de manera parasitaria.

Así, con el fin de asegurar su posición dominante y maximizar su ganancia explotativa apropiadamente, en un segundo paso, el estado dominante intentara crear constantemente una moneda internacional —y supremamente universal— controlada monopolicamente y emitida directamente desde su propio banco central o un banco mundial dominado por su banco central.

Existen ciertos obstáculos en el camino a esta meta. Sin embargo, una vez que el primer paso haya sido completado exitosamente, ninguno de ellos puede parecer insuperable. Naturalmente, el estado dominado perderá algo de su poder discrecional bajo este arreglo. But this would be compensated for by the fact that its own economy would function more efficiently, too, if calculational chaos in international trade were reduced. Further, the banking and business elite in both countries would be adamantly in favor of such a monetary regime and would use their close ties to their respective state and international connections to promote its adoption. For, after all, banks and industrial firms are also in the business of making money through production and exchanges. Freely fluctuating exchange rates are an artificial impediment in their pursuit of this economic interest. And they will be perceived as dysfunctional more intensively by larger businesses, because it is big business, in particular, for which foreign trade plays a more important role.

In fact, the most severe resistance to the adoption of an international currency is to be expected not from the states and the economic elites, but from the general public. Insofar as an international currency implies giving up an accustomed one, it runs against the very nationalism that all states eagerly bred for so long. This would be a problem especially if the public in the dominated countries were asked to adopt the dominant state’s currency directly—name and all—because the underlying imperialist nature of such a monetary system would then become dangerously apparent. Yet with some degree of diplomacy and patient propaganda, this problem seems solvable, too. A new currency with a new name must be created and defined in terms of existing national monies in order not to arouse nationalistic or anti-imperialist sentiments. This new currency must only be somewhat overvalued against the various national monies (which in turn are defined in terms of the new currency) in order to drive all national monies out of circulation (in accordance with Gresham’s law).[^31] This must be accompanied by the states’ and the economic elites’ constant appeal to the general public’s sound economic intuition that—regardless of all nationalistic feelings—freely fluctuating national monies are an anachronistic institution which cripples rational economic calculation, and that it is in everyone’s best interest to have an internationally (and if possible universally) used money such as the international banking system under the leadership of the dominant state’s central bank is willing to provide. Barring any drastic change in public opinion in the direction of a strengthened private property and sound money orientation and a correspondingly increased antistate vigilance, nothing will prevent the dominant state from achieving this complete international counterfeiting autonomy. And with a world money and world bank in place, and controlled by the dominant state’s central bank, a decisive step is taken toward reaching its ultimate goal of establishing itself as a full-scale world government, with world-wide control not only over counterfeiting, but also over taxation and legal regulation.

In light of this explanation of monetary imperialism and its function as a “natural” (from a statist viewpoint, that is) complement of military expansionism, the remaining pieces from the history of international politics fall into place. Hand in hand with the rise of Great Britain to the rank of the foremost imperialist nation state went a sterling imperialism. Not entirely free at the time of all internal obstacles in the way of counterfeiting, British-dominated countries were compelled to keep their reserves in the form of sterling balances in London, where the Bank of England would redeem them in gold. This way, these countries would pyramid their national currencies on top of the pound, and Britain could inflate sterling notes on top of gold without having to fear an outflow of gold. With Britain’s decline and the concurrent rise of the U.S. government to the position of the world’s leading military power, sterling imperialism has gradually been replaced by a dollar imperialism. At the end of World War II, with U.S. domination extended over most of the globe, and essentially ratified in the Bretton Woods agreement, the dollar became the world reserve currency on top of which all other states have inflated their various national paper monies.[^32] For a while, the U.S. officially still maintained the pretense of redeeming foreign central banks’ dollars in gold, and this somewhat limited its own inflationary potential. However, it did not prevent steady dollar counterfeiting on top of gold from occurring. The position of the U.S. as a militarily dominant international power (in the meantime formalized through a number of military pacts, most notably the NATO) allowed it to compel foreign governments to exercise their right to ask for redemption only sparingly if at all, so that its own dollar inflation could take place without setting off contractive consequences. And when its counterfeiting policy had incited foreign governments to become all too daring in their attempts to obtain gold at bargain prices, it was the U.S. government’s superior military might that finally allowed it to give up all pretense and declare its notes irredeemable. Since then the Federal Reserve System has acquired the position of an autonomous counterfeiter of last resort to the entire international banking system.[^33]

The imperialist nature of this dollar standard takes effect in particular through such instruments as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), and the Bank for International Settlement (BIS).[^34] Money and credit, created by the strike of a pen, is passed from these U.S.-dominated institutions first to foreign governments which inflate their national currencies on top of it and in turn pass this money on to their own cartelized banking system which, adding a further dose of counterfeiting, then hand it on to the various states’ favorite business establishments whence it ripples to the economic periphery. Parallel to this flow of money goes a reversed process of income and wealth redistribution from the periphery onto national business and banking elites and the various nation states as well as from the dominated territories to the U.S. government and the U.S. banking and business establishment as the ultimate center of world finance.

From a sociological point of view, the consequences are particularly interesting if these two integrated processes are superimposed on pre-modern, feudal societies. Such countries, primarily in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, are typically characterized by a class of feudal landlords, or feudal landlords-turned-financial-orindustrial-magnates controlling the state apparatus and mostly residing in the capital-city-and-seat-of-government; and by a class of largely landless, dependent peasants dispersed over the countryside and sustaining the state, the feudal elite, and the capital city through the payment of land rents.[^35] Dollar imperialism here means upholding feudal rule, supporting and participating in the exploitation of an impoverished peasantry and the countryside by a parasitic feudal caste and the capital city, and contributing in the latter’s suppression of any liberationist land reform movement. In fact, the typical Third World cycle of ruthless government oppression, revolutionary movements, civil war, renewed suppression, and prolonged economic dependency and mass poverty is to a significant extent caused and maintained by the U.S.-dominated international monetary system.

Since 1971, in particular, increased efforts have been undertaken in the direction of the second step in the process of monetary expansionism. Not all of the roughly 160 freely fluctuating currencies actually pose a problem, because most of them are in no danger for internal reasons of appreciating against the dollar and thereby strengthening the respective states’ power vis-à-vis that of the U.S. government, or they play such a minor role in international trade that the calculational chaos which is introduced by their existence is largely insignificant. However, because of the relative strength of their currencies and their important role in international trade, the major West European states as well as Japan are a problem. Hence it is to these states and currencies in particular that U.S-led attempts to create a world currency that helps rationalize economic calculation and at the same time safeguard U.S. domination and further increase its own inflationary powers have been directed. The creation of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), defined initially in terms of sixteen and later five leading export nations, and issued by the IMF, was a move toward a one-world currency and a one-world bank under U.S. domination.[^36] Another important push toward this goal was provided through the activities of the Trilateral Commission (TC), founded in 1973 as an offshoot of David Rockefeller’s Council on Foreign Relations. Composed of some 300 highly influential politicians, bankers, businessmen, as well as intellectuals and journalists from North America, Western Europe and Japan, the TC has made the establishment of a world paper currency and a world central bank its primary concern.[^37] Fervently supported by the TC as an intermediate step toward this ultimate goal as well as by several other politicianbanker-industrialist associations with a substantial overlap of membership with the TC and devoted to the same ends, such as the Action Committee for Europe, the Association for the Monetary Union of Europe, the Banking Federation of the European Community, the ECU Banking Association, the Basel Committee and the Wilton Park Group, great advances have been made in aligning the European monetary front. In 1979, the newly created European Currency Unit (ECU), issued under the aegis of the European Economic Community, first appeared. Defined as a weighted average of ten European currencies, and assisted by organizations such as the European Monetary System, the European Investment Bank, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications, and the European Monetary Cooperation Fund, the ECU has assumed a more and more important rule. Since as an average it is less volatile than the various national currencies, multinational banks and corporations in particular have found it increasingly attractive to use the ECU as a unit of account and a medium of settlement: economic calculation is less haphazard with only three currencies—the ECU, the yen, and the dollar—than with a dozen. In 1998, according to official intergovernmental agreements, the European Central Bank was established and the ECU became the all-European currency supplanting all national monies.[^38]

With the European calculational chaos solved, then, and in particular with the European hard currency countries neutralized and weakened within a cartel that by its very nature favors more against less inflationary countries so as to protect and prolong U.S. hegemony over Europe, little indeed would remain to be done. With essentially only three central banks and currencies and U.S. dominance over Europe and Japan, the most likely candidates to be chosen as a U.S-dominated World Central Bank are the IMP or the BIS: and under its aegis then, initially defined as a basket of the dollar, the ECU, and the yen, the “phoenix” (or whatever else its name may be) will rise as a one-world paper currency—unless, that is, public opinion as the only constraint on government growth undergoes a substantial change and the public begins to understand the lesson explained in this book: that economic rationality as well as justice and morality demand a worldwide gold standard and free, 100-percentreserve banking as well as free markets worldwide; and that world government, a world central bank and a world paper currency—contrary to the deceptive impression of representing universal values—actually means the universalization and intensification of exploitation, counterfeiting-fraud and economic destruction.[^39]

[^30]: On the purchasing power parity theory, see Mises, *Human Action,* pp. 452–58; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State,* pp. 715–22.

[^31]: On Gresham’s law see Mises, *Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 75, 77; *Human Action*, pp. 78l–83; Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 29–31.

[^32]: On the dollar standard established with the Bretton Woods system, see Henry Hazlitt, *From Bretton Woods to World Inflation* (Chicago: Regnery, 1984).

[^33]: Since 1971, at which time the gold standard was finally suspended, more money has been created than had previously been accumulated by all nations of the world since the beginning of time.

[^34]: On the imperialist nature of these institutions, see also Gabriel Kolko, *The Politics of War, the World and United States Foreign Policy 1943–1945* (New York: Random House, 1968), pp. 242–340.

[^35]: See Paul A. Baran, *Political Economy of Growth* (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1957), chaps. V–VI.

[^36]: See Hazlitt, From Bretton Woods to World Inflation.

[^37]: A sample of prominent U.S. members of the Trilateral Commission includes David M. Abshire, counselor to the President; Frank C. Carlucci, national security advisor; J.C. Whitehead, Deputy Secretary of State; Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve System; Winston Lord, Ambassador to China; George Bush, President; Paul A. Volcker, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve System; Alexander Haig, former Secretary of State; Jean Kirkpatrick, former Ambassador to the U.N.; David A. Stockman, former head of OMB; Caspar Weinberger, former Secretary of Defense; W. Michael Blumenthal, former Secretary of the Treasury; Zbigniew Brzezinski, former national security advisor; Harold Brown, former Secretary of Defense; James E. (Jimmy) Carter, former President; Richard N. Cooper, former Undersecretary of State for Economic and Monetary Affairs; Walter Mondale, former Vice President; Anthony M. Solomon, former Undersecretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs; Cyrus Vance, former Secretary of State; Andrew Young, former Ambassador to the U.N.; Lane E. Kirkland, head of AFL-CIO: Flora Lewis, *New York Times*; Thomas Johnson, *Los Angeles Times*; George Will, ABC television and *Newsweek*.

[^38]: See on this also Jeffrey Tucker, “The Contributions of Menger and Mises to the Foundations of Austrian Monetary Theory Together With One Modern Application,” (manuscript 1988), presented at the 13th annual conference of The Association for Private Enterprise Education, Cleveland, Ohio; and Ron Paul, “The Coming World Monetary Order,” A Special Report from the *Ron Paul Investment Letter* (1988). Prominent Europeans explicitly supporting the idea of a European Central Bank, the ECU, and finally a one-world currency include: G. Agnelli, Chairman of FIAT, TC; J. Deflassieux, Chairman of the BIS, TC; G. FitzGerald, former Prime Minister of Ireland, TC; L. Solana, President of Compania Telefonica Nacional de Espana, TC; G. Thorn, President of the European Community and former Prime Minister of Luxembourg, TC; N. Thygesen, Professor of Economics, Copenhagen University, TC; U. Agnelli, Vice President of FIAT; E. Balladour, Financial Minister of France; N. Brady, Dillon Read Investments; J. Callaghan, former Prime Minister of Britain; K. Carstens, former President of West Germany; P. Coffey, Professor of Economics University of Amsterdam; E. Davignon, former European Commissioner; J. Delors, former President of the European Community; W. Dusenberg, President of BIS; L. Fabius, former Prime Minister of France; J.R. Fourtou, President of Rhone-Poulence; R. d. La Jemere, former Governor of the Banque de France; V. Giscard d’Estaing, former President of France; Ch. Goodhart, Professor of Banking, London School of Economics; P. Guimbretiere, Director of the European Community’s ECU project; W. Guth, President of the Deutsche Bank; E. Heath, former British Prime Minister; M. Kohnstamm, former President of European University Institute, Florence; N. Lawson, British Chancellor of the Exchequer; L.M. Leveque, President of Credit Lyonnais; L. Lucchini, President of Confindustria Italy; F. Maude, British Minister for Corporate and Consumer Affairs; P. Mentre, Chairman of Credit National, France; H.L. Merkle, Chairman of Bosch Gmbh, West Germany; F. Mitterand, President of France; J. Monet, founder of the European Community; P.X. Ortoli, President of Total Oil and former Commissioner of the European Community; D. Rambure, Credit Lyonnais; H. Schmidt, former Chancellor of West Germany and Editor of die *ZEIT*; P. Sheehy, Chairman of BAT Industries; J. Solvay, Chairman of Solvay, Belgium; H.J. Vogel, Chairman of the German Social Democratic Party; J. Zijlstra, former President of the Nederlandse Bank.

[^39]: Jeffrey Tucker of the Ludwig von Mises Institute had an important influence on my understanding of the dynamics of the international monetary system—through frequent discussions as well as through granting me access to his own related research. Needless to say, all shortcomings are entirely my own.