### El Estado y la Monopolización del Dinero y la Banca

El orden económico del presente está caracterizado por monedas nacionales en lugar de una moneda universal; por dinero fiduciario en vez de productos como el oro; por bancos centrales monopolistas en lugar de bancos gratuitos; y por fraudes bancarios permanentes, además de la repetición constante de ingresos y la redistribución de riquezas, inflación permanente y ciclos comerciales que son recurrentes como sus equivalentes económicos, en lugar de utilizar un sistema cien por ciento de reservas bancarias sin alguna de estas consequencias.

En total contradicción al interés propio del hombre en maximizar riquezas mediante la integración económica, son los intereses antieconómicos que prevalecen sobre intereses económicos y por lo tanto son responsables de la emergencia del orden monetario contemporáneo.

Uno puede adquirir e incrementar sus riquezas mediante la cultivación, producción y por intercambios contractuales, o mediante la expropiación y explotación de cultivadores, productores e intercambios contractuales. No hay otras maneras. Los dos métodos son parte de la naturaleza del ser humano. Junto al interés en la producción y contratación ha existido siempre un interés en la adquisición de riquezas y propiedades por métodos extracontrancuales e improductivas. Durante el curso de la evolución económica, tal y como el primer interés puede dar lugar a empresas y corporaciones productivas, también el segundo interés puede facilitar la creación de grandes empresas y ocasionar gobiernos y estados.[^9]

El tamaño y crecimiento de la empresa productiva está restringida. Esto se debe en parte a la demanda voluntaria del consumidor, y por otra parte es debido a la competición de otros productores que constantemente obligan a las compañías a operar con los costes más bajos si quieren mantener su negocio abierto. Para que un negocio como este crezca en su magnitud, las necesidades y demandas urgentes del consumidor deben servirse de la forma más efectiva. Solamente las adquisiciones voluntarias del consumidor apoyarán su magnitud.

Las restrincciones sobre otro tipo de institución-el estado-son totalmente diferentes.[^10] Por una parte, es obviamente absurdo proponer que su emergencia y crecimiento se determina por un tipo de demanda, como se puede decir sobre una firma económica. Uno no puede decir, ni con mucha imaginación, que los cultivadores, productores o intercambiadores contractuales que deben rendir (una parte de) sus ganancias al estado, han sido los demandantes de tal servicio. Al contratio, son obligados a aceptarlo, y esto se pone en evidencia por el hecho de que no existe una demanda para este servicio. Por otra parte, el estado no esta constreñido por competición tal y como una empresa productiva lo está. Porque, al contrario de semejante empresa, el estado no debe mantener los costes de operación al mínimo. Puede operar por encima del coste mínimo, ya que puede transferir sus elevados costes a sus competitores a medida de impuestos y la regulación de actividades. En lo que un estado surge, lo hace a pesar del hecho de que no está en demanda y no funciona de forma eficiente.

Instead of by cost and demand conditions, the growth of an exploiting firm is constrained by public opinion: Nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions require coercion, and coercion creates victims. It is conceivable that resistance can be lastingly broken by force in the case of one man (or one group of men) exploiting one or maybe two or three others (or a group of roughly the same size). It is inconceivable, however, to imagine that force alone can account for the breaking down of resistance in the actually familiar case of small minorities expropriating and exploiting populations ten, hundreds, or thousands of times their size. For this to happen a firm must have public support in addition to coercive force. A majority of the population must accept its operations as legitimate. This acceptance can range from active enthusiasm to passive resignation. However, acceptance it must be in the sense that a majority must have given up the idea of actively or passively resisting any attempt to enforce nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions. Instead of displaying outrage over such actions, of showing contempt for everyone who engages in them, and of doing nothing to help make them successful (not to mention actively trying to obstruct them), a majority must actively or passively support them. State-supportive public opinion must counterbalance the resistance of victimized property owners such that active resistance appears futile. And the goal of the state, then, and of every state employee who wants to contribute toward securing and improving his own position within the state, is and must be that of maximizing exploitatively acquired wealth and income by producing favorable public opinion and creating legitimacy.

There are two complementary measures available to the state trying to accomplish this. On the one hand, there is ideological propaganda. Much time and effort is spent persuading the public that things are not really as they appear: Exploitation is really freedom; taxes are really voluntary: noncontractual relations are really “conceptually” contractual ones;[^11] no one is ruled by anyone but we all rule ourselves; without the state neither law nor security exists; and the poor would perish, etc.

On the other hand, there is redistribution. Instead of being a mere parasitic consumer of goods that others have produced, the state redistributes some of its coercively appropriated wealth to people outside the state apparatus and thereby attempts to corrupt them into assuming state-supportive roles.

But not just any redistribution will do. Just as ideologies must serve a—statist—purpose, so must redistribution. Redistribution requires cost-expenditures and thus needs a justification. It is not undertaken by the state simply in order to do something nice for some people, as, for instance, when someone gives someone else a present. Nor is it done simply to gain as high an income as possible from exchanges, as when an ordinary economic business engages in trade. It is undertaken in order to secure the further existence and expansion of exploitation and expropriation. Redistribution must serve this strategic purpose. Its costs must be justified in terms of increased state income and wealth. The political entrepreneurs in charge of the state apparatus can err in this task, as can ordinary businessmen, because their decisions about which redistributive measures best serve this purpose have to be made in anticipation of their actual results. And if entrepreneurial errors occur, the state’s income may actually fall instead of rising, possibly even jeopardizing its own existence. It is the very purpose of state politics and the function of political entrepreneurship to avoid such situations and to choose instead a policy that increases state income.

While neither the particular forms of redistributive policies nor their particular outcomes can be predicted, but rather change with changing circumstances, the nature of the state still requires that its redistributive policy must follow a certain order and display a certain structural regularity.[^12]

As a firm engaged in the maximization of exploitatively appropriated wealth, the state’s first and foremost area in which it applies redistributive measures is the production of security, i.e., of police, defense, and a judicial system. The state ultimately rests on coercion and thus cannot do without armed forces. Any competing armed forces—which would naturally emerge on the market in order to satisfy a genuine demand for security and protection services—are a threat to its existence and must be eliminated. To do this is to arrogate the job to itself and become the monopolistic supplier and redistributor of protection services for a defined territory. Similarly, a competing judicial system would pose an immediate threat to a state’s claim to legitimacy. And again, for the sake of its own existence the judicial system must also be monopolized and legal services included in redistributive schemes.

The state’s nature as an institution engaged in organized aggression also explains the importance of the next field of redistributive activities: that of traffic and communication. There can be no regular exploitation without monopolistic control of rivers, coasts, seaways, streets, railroads, airports, mail, and telecommunication systems. Thus, these things, too, must become the object of redistribution.

Of similar importance is the field of education. Depending as it does on public opinion and its acceptance of the state’s actions as legitimate, it is essential for a state that unfavorable ideological competition be eliminated as far as possible and statist ideologies spread. The state attempts to accomplish this by providing educational services on a redistributive basis.

Furthered by a system of state education, the next crucial area for redistribution is that of redistributing state power itself, i.e., the right assumed by the state to expropriate, exploit and redistribute nonproductively appropriated assets. Instead of remaining an institution which restricts entry into itself and/or particular government positions, a state increasingly, and for obvious strategic reasons, adopts an organizational structure which in principle opens up every position to everyone and grants equal and universal rights of participation and competition in the determination of state policy. Everyone—not just a privileged nobility—receives a legal stake in the state in order to reduce the resistance to state power.[^13]

With the monopolization of law and security production, traffic, communication and education, as well as the democratization of state rule itself, all features of the modern state have been identified but one: the state’s monopolization of money and banking. For all but this one it has been explained, albeit briefly, how they can and must be understood as performing strategic functions: why and how they are not normal productive contributions determined by demand and supply forces or simply good deeds, but redistributive activities which serve the purpose of stabilizing and, if possible, increasing a state’s exploitatively appropriated income and wealth.

The monopolization of money and banking is the ultimate pillar on which the modern state rests. In fact, it has probably become the most cherished instrument for increasing state income. For nowhere else can the state make the connection between redistribution-expenditure and exploitation-return more directly, quickly and securely than by monopolizing money and banking. And nowhere else are the state’s schemes less clearly understood than here.

Preferring, like everyone, a higher to a lower income, yet unlike others, being in the business of nonproductive and noncontractual property acquisitions, the state’s position regarding money and banking is obvious: Its objectives are served best by a pure fiat money monopolistically controlled by the state. For only then are all barriers to counterfeiting removed (short of an entire breakdown of the monetary system through hyperinflation) and the state can increase its own income and wealth at another’s expense practically without cost and without having to fear bankruptcy.[^14]

However, there are obstacles in the way of attaining this enviable state of affairs. On one hand, there is the inexorable fact that money can emerge only as a commodity. (It is impossible to start out with fiat money).[^15] On the other hand, there is the problem that while enrichment through counterfeiting is no doubt less conspicuous than doing so by means of taxation, it is nonetheless a measure that is bound to be noticed, certainly by the banks, particularly if it occurs on a regular basis. And so it is also impossible for the state to get away with institutionalized counterfeiting unless it can be combined with redistributive measures which are capable of bringing about another favorable change in public opinion. This problem and the state’s natural desire essentially determine the course of its actions.

As the result of free market processes, the state finds gold established as money and a system of free banking. Its goal is the destruction of this system and with it the removal of all obstacles to counterfeiting. Technically (ignoring for the moment all psychological difficulties involved in this), the sequence of steps that must be taken in order to accomplish this objective is then dictated: In a first step the minting of gold must be monopolized by the state. This serves the purpose of psychologically denationalizing gold by shifting the emphasis from gold as denominated in universal terms of weight to gold as denominated in terms of fiat labels. And it removes a first important obstacle toward counterfeiting because it gives the state the very institutional means of enriching itself through a systematic process of currency debasement.

[^9]: Contrary to the claim of the public choice school, states and private firms are not doing essentially the same sort of business, but instead are engaged in categorically different types of operations. Both types of institutions are the outcome of different, antagonistic interests. The “political” interest in exploitation and expropriation underlying the formation of states obviously requires and presupposes the existence of wealth, and hence an “economic” interest of at least one person in producing such wealth in the first place (while the reverse is not true). But at the same time, the more pronounced and successful political interests are, the more destructive of economic interests this will be. The public choice school is perfectly correct in pointing out that everyone—a government employee no less than an employee of an economic firm—normally prefers a higher to a lower income and that this interest explains why government should be expected to have no less of a tendency to grow than any other enterprise.

However, this discovery—that politicians and bureaucrats are no more altruistic or concerned about the public good than are people in other walks of life—is hardly new even if it has sometimes been overlooked. Yet what is in fact new with public choice is the inference drawn from this correct insight then, that all institutions should hence be regarded as an outgrowth of identical motivational forces and be treated analytically on a par with each other—is false to the point of being ridiculous. Regardless of a person’s subjective beliefs, integrating one’s actions into the institutional framework of either the state or a “normal” economic enterprise and pursuing one’s wealth maximizing interests here or there will in fact produce categorically different outcomes. On a representative statement of the public choice school regarding the idea of the “state as a firm” and of “political exchange” as essentially the same as economic exchange, see James Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1965), p. 19; for a critique of this view and the fundamental difference between economic and political means, see Franz Oppenheimer, *The State* (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914), pp. 24–27; Murray N. Rothbard, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 2.

[^10]: On the following theory of the state, see Murray N. Rothbard, *For a New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978); *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer, 1989); Anthony de Jasay, *The State* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).

[^11]: On the semantic confusion spread through the term “conceptual agreement” in particular by James Buchanan, see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “The Fallacies of the Public Goods Theory and the Production of Security,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 9, no. 1 (1989); supra, chap. 1.

[^12]: See Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat*, chap. 5.3; *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chap. 8.

[^13]: On democratization as a means of expanding state power, see Bertrand de Jouvenel, *On Power* (New York: Viking Press, 1949), pp. 9–10.

[^14]: On the state’s inherent tendency toward achieving an unrestricted counterfeiting monopoly, see Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking;* idem, *What Has Government Done to Our Money?* (San Rafael, Calif.: Libertarian Publishers, 1985).

[^15]: On the impossibility of money originating as a fiat paper money, see the regression theorem: Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 97–123; *Human Action*, pp. 408–10; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State,* vol. I, pp. 231–37.