## Teoría del empleo, el dinero, el interés y el proceso capitalista: el caso misesiano contra Keynes

Mi objetivo es reconstruir algunas verdades básicas sobre el proceso de desarrollo económico y el papel que desempeñan en él el empleo, el dinero y el interés. Estas verdades no se originaron con la Escuela Austriaca de economía, ni son parte integral de esta tradición de pensamiento económico solo. De hecho, la mayoría de ellos formaban parte de lo que hoy se llama economía clásica, y fue el reconocimiento de su validez lo que distinguió al economista del chiflado. Sin embargo, la Escuela Austriaca, en particular Ludwig von Mises y, más tarde, Murray N. Rothbard, han dado la presentación más clara y completa de estas verdades. <sup id="fnref:1"><a href="#fn:1" class="footnote-ref"> 1 </ 0> Además, también han presentado su defensa más rigurosa que la última instancia, son deducibles de proposiciones básicas e incontestables (historias como las que el hombre actúa y sabe lo que significa actuar). decisivo, equivaldría a contradicciones y absurdos lógico-praxeológicos. 2</p> 

<p>
  Primeramente, voy a reconstruir sistemáticamente esta teoría austríaca del desarrollo económico. Después regresaré a la "nueva" teoría de Keynes, la cual pertenece, de un modo en qué él mismo no puede hacer otra cosa que aceptar, a la tradición de economía de "inframundo" (como el Mercantilismo) y de manivelas económicas (como Silvio Gesell).<fnref target="3" /> Mostraré que la nueva economía de Keynes, también, es falla en su funcionamiento: un tejido de falsedades lógico-praxeológicas alcanzadas mediante jerga oscura, definiciones cambiantes, e inconsistencias lógicas, intento de crear una mentalidad anticapitalista, anti-propiedad-privada y anti-burguesía.
</p>

<h3>
</h3>

<h4>
  Empleo
</h4>

<p>
  "El desempleo en el mercado sin restricciones es siempre voluntario".<fnref target="4" />El hombre trabaja, porque prefiere su resultado anticipado a la desutilidad del trabajo y que el ingreso psíquico sea derivado del ocio. Él "deja de trabajar en ese momento, en el que comienza a valorar el ocio, la ausencia de desutilidad del trabajo, más que el incremento en la satisfacción esperada por trabajar más".<fnref target="5" /> Obviamente, entonces, Robinson Crusoe, el productor auto-suficiente, solo puede estar desempleado voluntariamente (porque prefiere permanecer ocioso y consumir valores actuales en lugar de gastar trabajo adicional en la producción de valores futuros).
</p>

<p>
  El resultado no difiere cuando Friday entra en la escena y una economía de propiedad privada es establecida basada sobre un reconocimiento inicial de los derechos exclusivos de todas las personas sobre esos recursos que había reconocido como escasos y apropiados (domésticamente) a través de la mezcla de su trabajo con ellos antes de que cualquier otro lo hubiese hecho, de modo que todos los bienes hubiesen sido producidos con su ayuda. En esta situación no solo las proporciones de cambio—precios—para la compra o alquiler de bienes materiales se vuelven posibles, sino que también lo hacen los precios (salarios) para el alquiler de servicios de trabajo. El empleo sobrevendrá siempre que el salario ofrecido se encuentre valorado más altamente por el trabajador que la satisfacción que provendría del trabajo auto-suficiente con y/o el consumo de sus propios recursos (o de la apropiación de recursos previamente submarginales). El empleo aumentará, y los salarios se elevarán, mientras que los empresarios perciban los salarios existentes más bajos que el producto de valor marginal (descontado por la preferencia de tiempo)<fnref target="6" /> del que un correspondiente incremento en el empleo del trabajo puede esperarse que se produzca. Por otra parte, el desempleo resultará, y se incrementará, siempre y cuando una persona valore el producto de valor marginal alcanzado a través del auto-empleo de manera más elevada que un salario que refleje la productividad marginal de sus servicios de trabajo.
</p>

<p>
  En esta construcción no hay cabida lógica para tal cosa como desempleo involuntario. Así como el empleo es siempre voluntario, también lo es el desempleo (auto-empleo).<fnref target="7" />
</p>

<p>
  El desempleo involuntario es solo lógicamente posible una vez que la situación ha cambiado fundamentalmente y es introducida una persona o institución que puede exitosamente ejercer control sobre recursos de los que no ha tomado propiedad, o adquirido a través del intercambio voluntario de propietarios domésticos. Tal institución extra-mercado, a través de la imposición, por ejemplo, de un salario mínimo superior que la productividad marginal del trabajo, puede efectivamente prohibir un intercambio entre un proveedor de servicio de trabajo y un capitalista que sería preferido por ambos, si ambos tienen control irrestricto sobre su propiedad doméstica. El aspirante a trabajador pasa entonces a estar involuntariamente desempleado, y el aspirante a empleador se ve forzado a dislocar factores de producción complementarios de usos productivos mayores a otros menores. De hecho, una institución extra-mercado puede en principio crear cualquier cantidad deseada de desempleo involuntario. A minimum wage of say, $1 million per hour would, if enforced, involuntarily disemploy practically everyone and would, along this way toward forced self-employment, condemn most of today’s population to death by starvation.
</p>

<p>
  In the absence of an institution exempt from the rules of the market involuntary unemployment is logically impossible, and prosperity instead of impoverishment will result.
</p>

<h4>
  Money
</h4>

<p>
  Man participates in an exchange economy (instead of remaining in self-sufficient isolation) insofar as he is capable of recognizing the higher productivity of a system of the division of labor and he prefers more goods over less. Out of his market participation arises in turn his desire for a medium of exchange (money). Indeed, only if one were to assume the humanly impossible (that man had perfect foresight regarding the future), would there be no purpose for him to have money. For with all uncertainties removed, in the never-never land of equilibrium one would know precisely the terms, times, and locations of all future exchanges, and everything could be prearranged accordingly and would take on the form of direct rather than indirect exchanges.<fnref target="8" /> Under the inescapable human condition of uncertainty, however, when all this is not known and action must by nature be speculative, man will begin to demand goods no longer exclusively because of their use-value, but also because of their value as media of exchange.
</p>

<p>
  Faced with a situation where his reservation demand for some supplied goods or services is low or nonexistent, and where a directly satisfying exchange, due to the absence of double coincidences of wants, is out of the question, he will also consider trading whenever the goods to be acquired are more marketable than those to be surrendered, such that their possession would then facilitate the acquisition of directly serviceable goods and services at not yet known future dates.
</p>

<p>
  Moreover, since it is the very function of a medium of exchange to facilitate future purchases of directly serviceable goods, man will naturally prefer the acquisition of a more marketable and, at the limit, universally marketable medium of exchange to that of a less or nonuniversally marketable one so that
</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>
    there would be an inevitable tendency for the less marketable of the series of goods used as media of exchange to be one by one rejected until at last only a single commodity remained, which was universally employed as a medium of exchange; in a word, money.<fnref target="9" />
  </p>
</blockquote>

<p>
  On the way toward this ultimate goal, by selecting monies that are increasingly more widely used, the division of labor is extended and productivity increased.
</p>

<p>
  However, once a commodity has been established as a universal medium of exchange, and the prices of all directly serviceable exchange goods are expressed in terms of units of this money (while the price of the money unit is its power to purchase an array of nonmoney goods), money no longer exercises any systematic influence on the division of labor, employment, and produced income. Once established, any amount of money is compatible with any amount of employment and income.<fnref target="10" /> Indeed, as explained above, in the nevernever land of equilibrium there would be no money, but there would still be employment and income. This demonstrates that money on the one hand and employment and income on the other must be regarded as logically-praxeologically independent and unrelated concepts. For instance, should the supply of money increase, other things being equal, this would surely have redistributive effects, depending on where and how the additional money entered the economy; but it would just as surely have no systematic effect on the amount of employment and the size of the social product. Prices and wages generally would go up, and the purchasing power of the money unit would go down. However, nothing would follow with regard to employment and social product. They may be different, or they may be the same. The same is true of changes in the demand for money. An increase in the demand for money (i.e., a higher relative value attached to additional cash as compared to additional nonmoney), would certainly change relative prices; yet it would not imply anything as far as employment and social product is concerned. In equilibrating an increased demand for money with a given stock of money, the general level of prices and wages must fall, and the purchasing power of the money unit must rise, <em>mutatis mutandis</em>. But there is no reason to suppose that this should have any impact on employment or income. Money wages fall, but simultaneously the purchasing power of money increases, leaving real wages and real social product entirely unaffected.
</p>

<p>
  The result is no different if changes on the nonmoney side are considered. Other things being equal, an increase in the supply of goods and services, for instance, brings about an increase in the purchasing power of money; money prices fall. This reduces the quantity of money demanded (the demand schedule for money being given), because the cost of holding onto money instead of spending it on non-money has risen; and this lowered demand for cash implies in turn a reverse tendency toward rising prices and a reduced purchasing power of money. Nothing concerning employment and social product follows. Nor does the picture change when expectations are explicitly taken into account. Inflationary (deflationary) expectations reduce (increase) the demand for money immediately and thus speed up the adjustment toward whatever has been anticipated; and if something wrong has been anticipated (i.e., something out of line with the underlying reality), then the process of self-corrective adjustments is sped up through the workings of expectations. But none of these monetary phenomena has any systematic praxeological connection with employment and social product, which may well remain the same throughout all monetary changes.
</p>

<p>
  Invariably, money is “neutral” to employment and social product.
</p>

<footnotes>
  <fn name="1">
    <p>
      See in particular Ludwig von Mises, <em>Human Action</em> (Chicago: Regnery, 1966); Murray N. Rothbard, <em>Man, Economy, and State</em> (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="2">
    <p>
      See on the foundations of economics Ludwig von Mises, <em>Epistemological Problems of Economics</em> (New York: New York University Press, 1981); idem, <em>Theory and History</em> (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); idem, <em>The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science</em> (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1978); Murray N. Rothbard, <em>Individualism and the Philosophy of the Social Sciences</em> (San Francisco: Cato Institute, 1979); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, <em>Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung. Untersuchugen zur Grundlegung von Soziologie und Ökonomie</em> (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1983); idem, <em>Praxeology and Economic Science</em> (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).
    </p>
    
    <p>
      On the competing, positivist view of economics, according to which economic laws are hypotheses subject to empirical confirmation and falsification (much like the laws of physics), see Milton Friedman, “The Methodology of Positive Economics,” in idem, <em>Essays in Positive Economics</em> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="3">
    <p>
      John Maynard Keynes, <em>The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money</em> (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1964), esp. chap. 23.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="4">
    <p>
      Mises, <em>Human Action</em>, p. 599.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="5">
    <p>
      Ibid., p. 611.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="6">
    <p>
      On time preference, see the following section 1.3.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="7">
    <p>
      The claim that involuntary unemployment is possible in the framework of a private property economy as characterized above is due to an elementary logical-conceptual confusion: It ignores the fact that employment is a two-party affair; i.e., an exchange which, like any voluntary exchange, can only take place if it is deemed <em>mutually</em>, <em>bilaterally</em> beneficial. It makes no more sense to classify someone as involuntarily unemployed if he cannot find anybody willing to meet his unilaterally fixed demands for employment, than to call a person in search of a wife, a house, or a Mercedes involuntarily wifeless, homeless, or Mercedesless because no one wants to marry him or supply him with a house or a Mercedes <em>at terms which this person has unilaterally determined as agreeable to him.</em> Absurdity and contradiction would result if one were to do so. For then one would not only have to accept, as the other side of the same coin, that the boycotting employer, woman, or owner of a house or a Mercedes in turn would have to be regarded as an involuntary <em>non</em>employer, <em>non</em>wife, or <em>non</em>trader of a house or a Mercedes <em>because his/her unilateral demands had not been met by the wouldbe employee, would-be husband, or would-be house or Mercedes owner just as much as they had not met his</em>. Moreover, with both the would-be employee as well as the would-be employer classified as involuntarily being what they are because no mutual agreement had been reached between them, to create “voluntary employment” would imply coercing either one or both parties to accept an exchange whose terms one or both of them regard as unacceptable. Hence, to say involuntary unemployment is possible on the unhampered market is to say coercion means voluntariness and voluntariness coercion, which is nonsense.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="8">
    <p>
      See Mises, <em>Human Action</em>, pp. 244–50.
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        In a system without change in which there is no uncertainty whatever about the future, nobody needs to hold cash. Every individual knows precisely what amount of money he will need at any future date. He is therefore in a position to lend all the funds he receives in such a way that the loans fall due on the date he will need them. (p. 249)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <p>
      See also Rothbard, <em>Man, Economy, and State</em>, p. 280.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="9">
    <p>
      Ludwig von Mises, <em>The Theory of Money and Credit</em> (Irvington, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1971), pp. 32–33; see also Carl Menger, <em>Principles of Economics</em> (New York: New York University Press, 1981); idem, <em>Geld</em>, in Carl Menger, <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, ed. F.A. Hayek (Tübingen: Mohr, 1970), vol. 4.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="10">
    <p>
      See Rothbard, <em>Man, Economy, and State</em>, pp. 669–71.
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        Goods are useful and scarce, and any increment in goods is a social benefit. But money is useful not directly, but only in exchanges…. When there is less money, the exchange-value of the monetary unit rises; when there is more money, the exchange-value of the monetary unit falls. We conclude that there is no such thing as “too little” or “too much” money, <em>that, whatever the social money stock, the benefits of money are always utilized to the maximum extent</em>. (p. 670)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <p>
      See also Murray N. Rothbard, <em>The Mystery of Banking</em> (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983).
    </p>
  </fn>
</footnotes>