En tercer lugar, cualquier persona que haya observado algunas comisarías y tribunales estatales, sin mencionar las cárceles, sabrá lo cierto que es que los elementos de producción utilizados para proporcionarnos esa seguridad se utilizan en abundancia, se mantienen mal y son sucios. Como nadie que utilice estos elementos de producción en realidad los posee (ninguna persona puede venderlos y apropiarse en privado de los ingresos generados por la venta) y las pérdidas (y ganancias) en el valor ingresado en el capital utilizado se socializan, todos tendran la tendencia a aumentar su capital privado de ingresos resultantes del uso de los elementos a expensas de las pérdidas en el valor del capital. Por lo tanto, el costo marginal tendrá la tendencia a exceder cada vez más el valor del producto marginal, y se va a producir una utilización en exceso del capital. Y si, en un caso insólito, esto no es así y una utilización en exceso no debería ser aparente, esto solo ha sido posible a costos que son de forma comparativa mucho más grandes que los de cualquier empresa privada similar.[^26]

Sin duda alguna, todos estos problemas relacionados a un sistema de producción monopólica de seguridad se resolverían con mucha rapidez una vez que una demanda determinada de servicios de seguridad se complaceria con un mercado competitivo con una estructura de incentivos totalmente diferentes para todos los productores. Esto no necesariamente quiere decir que se obtenga una solución "perfecta" al problema relacionado con la seguridad. Aún seguirian sucediendo robos y asesinatos; y no se recuperarían todos los tesoros ni se atraparían a todos los asesinos. Pero en términos de evaluaciones de los consumidores, la situación iría mejorando en la medida en que la naturaleza del ser humano le permita mejorar. En primer lugar, siempre que exista un sistema competitivo (es decir, mientras que los productores de servicios de seguridad dependan de compras voluntarias de las personas, la mayoría de las cuales probablemente tomen la forma de contratos de servicios y seguros acordados antes de cualquier "acontecimiento" real de inseguridad o agresión), ningún productor podría aumentar sus ingresos sin mejorar los servicios o la calidad del producto tal como lo reciben los consumidores. Además, todos los productores de seguridad de forma conjunta no podrían reforzar la importancia de su industria particular a menos de que, por cualquier motivo, los consumidores comenzaran a evaluar la seguridad más que otros bienes de ellos, garantizando de esta forma que la producción de seguridad nunca se acabo por medio de la producción reducida de, digamos, queso, como un bien privado competidor. Además, los productores de servicios de seguridad tendrían que cambiar o modificar sus ofertas en gran parte porque existe una demanda muy variada de productores de seguridad entre millones y millones de consumidores. Dependiendo de forma directa del apoyo proporcionado de forma voluntaria de los consumidores, de forma inmediata se verían perjudicados financieramente si no responden adecuadamente a los diversos deseos de todos los consumidores o si cambian de deseo. Por lo tanto, cada consumidor poseería una influencia directa, aunque un poco pequeña, sobre la producción de bienes que aparecen o desaparecen del mercado relacionado a la seguridad. En lugar de ofrecer un "paquete de seguridad" igual para todos, una característica de la política de producción estatal, comenzarían a aparecer una multitud de paquetes de servicios en el mercado. Ellos serán adaptados a las diferentes necesidades de seguridad de distintas personas, tomando en cuenta las diferentes ocupaciones, las diferentes conductas de riesgo, las diferentes necesidades de protección y seguro, y las diferentes ubicaciones geográgicas y limitaciones de tiempo que todas estas personas posean.

Pero esto está muy lejos de todo. Pero eso además de la variedad, mejoraría el contenido y la calidad de los productos, tambien lejos de todo. No solo mejoraría de forma considerable el trato de los consumidores por parte de los empleados que trabajen en las empresas de seguridad, la actitud "no puedo cuidad", la injusticia e incluso la brutalidad, la negligencia y la tardanza de los actuales sistemas policiales y judiciales terminarían por desaparecer. Dado que los policías y los jueces dependerán del apoyo voluntario de los consumidores, cualquier solicitud de maltrado de los consumidores, de descortesía e incapacidad podría costarle sus trabajos. Además, la característica de que la resolución de disputas entre un cliente y su socio comercial se confía frecuentemente a juicio de este último, casi con certeza desaparecerá de los libros, el arbitraje de conflictos por parte de partes independientes se convertirá en el estándar ofrecido por los productores de seguridad. Lo que es más importante, para atraer y mantener retenido a los clientes, los productores de dichos servicios de seguridad deberían ofrecer contratos que permitan al consumidor saber lo que estaba comprando y le permitan plantear una reclamación válida e intersubjetivamente comprobada si el rendimiento real del productor de seguridad no cumplió con los terminos acordados en el contrato. Más específicamente, en la medida en que no son contratos de servicio individualizados donde el cliente realiza un pago para cubrir sus propios riesgos, sino que son contratos de seguro donde se requiere unir los riesgos propios con los de otras personas, de forma contraria a la práctica estatista actual, estos contratos ciertamente ya no podrían contener nigún esquema redistributivo deliberadamente ingresado que pueda favorecer a un grupo de personas a expensas de otro. De forma contraria, si alguien tuviera la sensación de que el contrato que se le ofrecía requería que se pagara por las necesidades y riesgos peculiares de otras personas -factores de posible inseguridad, es decir, que no se distinguía como aplicables a su propio caso- simplemente estos rechazarían la firma o descontinuarían sus pagos.

Sin embargo, cuando todas estas cosas se dice, la pregunta inevitablemente surge a la superficie. "¿No sería necesario un sistema competitivo de producción de seguridad el resultado de un conflicto social que se encuentra de forma permanente, en el caos y la anarquía?". Se pueden realizar varias respuestas para esta pregunta. En primer lugar, debe tomarse en cuenta que tal impresión de ninguna manera estaría de acuerdo con la evidencia histórica y concreta. Los sistemas tribunales competentes han existido en varios lugares (por ejemplo, en la antiguedad en Irlanda o en la época de la liga Hanseática) antes de la llegado del estado moderno, y por lo que sabemos, funcionaron de forma correcta. [^27] A juzgar por la tasa de delincuencia qu existe (crimen por cápita), la policia privada en el llamado salvaje oeste (que por cierto no era tan salvaje como lo muestran en algunas películas) fue relativamente más exitosa que la policía actual apoyada por el estado.[^28] Y regresando a la experiencia y ejemplos contemporáneos, millones y millones de contratos internacionales existen incluso ahora -contratos de comercios y viajes- y de cierta forma parece ser una exageración decir, por ejemplo, que hay más fraude, más crímenes, más incumplimento de contrato allí que en las relaciones domésticas. Y esto, debe ser notado, sin que haya un gran productor monopólico de seguridad y un legislador. Finally it is not to be forgotten that even now in a great number of countries there are various private security producers alongside the state: private investigators, insurance detectives, and private arbitrators. Their work seems to confirm the thesis that they are more, not less, successful in resolving social conflicts than their public counterparts.

However, this historical evidence is very much subject to dispute, in particular regarding whether any general information can be derived from it. Yet there are systematic reasons, too, why the fear expressed by the question is not well-founded. Paradoxical as it may seem, establishing a competitive system of security producers implies erecting an institutionalized incentive structure to produce an order of law and law-enforcement that embodies the highest possible degree of consensus regarding the question of conflict resolution. Such a structure will tend to generate less rather than more social unrest and conflict than would occur under monopolistic auspices.[^29] In order to understand this paradox, it is necessary to take a closer look at the only typical situation that concerns the skeptic and that allows him to believe in the superior virtue of a monopolistically organized order of security production: when a conflict arises between A and B, both are insured by different companies and the companies cannot come to an immediate agreement regarding the validity of the conflicting claims brought forward by their respective clients. (No problem would exist if such an agreement were reached or if both clients were insured by one and the same company—at least the problem then would not be different in any way from that emerging under a statist monopoly.) Would not such a situation always result in a shoot-out? This is highly unlikely. First, any violent battle between companies would be costly and risky, in particular if these companies had reached a respectable size (which would be important for them to have in order to appear as effective guarantors of security to their prospective clients in the first place). More importantly, under a competitive system with each company dependent on the continuation of voluntary consumer payments, any battle would have to be deliberately supported by each and every client of both companies. If there were only one person who withdrew his payments because he was not convinced a battle was necessary in the particular conflict at hand, there would be immediate economic pressure on the company to look for a peaceful solution to the conflict.[^30] Hence any competitive producer of security would be extremely cautious about engaging in violent measures in order to resolve conflicts. Rather, to the extent that it is peaceful conflict resolution that consumers want, each and every security producer would go to great lengths to provide it to its clients and to establish in advance, for everyone to know, to what arbitration process it would be willing to submit itself and its clients in case of a disagreement over the evaluation of conflicting claims. And as such a scheme could appear to the clients of different firms to be working only if there were agreement among them regarding such arbitrational measures, a system of law governing relations between companies that would be universally acceptable to the clients of all of the competing security producers would naturally evolve. Moreover, the economic pressure to generate rules representing a consensus on how conflicts should be handled is even more farreaching. Under a competitive system, the independent arbitrators who would be entrusted with the task of finding peaceful solutions to conflicts would be dependent on the continued support of the two disputing companies insofar as the companies could and would select different judges if either one of them were sufficiently dissatisfied with the outcome of the arbitration work. Thus, these judges would be under pressure to find solutions to the problems handed over to them that, this time not with respect to the procedural aspects of law but its content, would be acceptable to all of the clients of the firms involved.[^31] Otherwise one or all of the companies might lose customers, thus inducing those firms to turn to different arbitrators the next time they are in need of one.[^32]

But wouldn’t it be possible under a competitive system for a security producing firm to become an outlaw company—a firm, that is, which, supported by its own clients, started aggressing against others? There is certainly no way to deny that this might be possible, though again it must be emphasized that here one is in the realm of empirical social science and no one could know such a thing with certainty. And yet the tacit implication that the possibility that a security firm could become an outlaw company somehow indicates a severe deficiency in the philosophy and economics of a pure capitalist social order is fallacious.[^33]

First, it should be recalled that any social system, a statist-socialist order no less than a pure market economy, is dependent for its continued existence on public opinion and that a given state of public opinion at all times delimits what can or cannot occur as well as what is more or less likely to occur. The current state of public opinion in West Germany, for instance, makes it highly unlikely or even impossible that a statist-socialist system of the current Soviet type could be imposed on the West German public. The lack of public support for such a system would doom it to failure and make it collapse. It is even more unlikely that any attempt to impose a Soviet-type order could ever hope to succeed among Americans, given American public opinion. Hence, in order for us to see the problem of outlaw companies correctly, the above question should be phrased as follows: How likely is it that any such event would occur in a given society with its specific state of public opinion? Formulated in this way, it is clear that the answer would have to be different for different societies. For some, characterized by socialist ideas deeply entrenched in the public, there would be a greater likelihood of the reemergence of aggressor companies, and for other societies there would be a much smaller chance of this happening. But then, would the prospect of a competitive system of security production in any given case be better or worse than that of the continuation of a statist system? Let us look, for instance, at the present-day United States. Assume that by a legislative act the state had abolished its right to provide security with tax funds and a competitive system of security production was introduced. Given the state of public opinion, how likely then would it be that outlaw producers would spring up, and what if they did? Evidently, the answer would depend on the reactions of the public to this changed situation. Thus, the first reply to those challenging the idea of a private market for security would have to be: What about you? What would your reaction be? Does your fear of outlaw companies mean that you would then go out and engage in trade with a security producer that aggressed against other people and their property, and would you continue supporting it if it did? Certainly the critic would be much muted by this counterattack. But more important than this is the systematic challenge implied in this personal counterattack. Evidently, the described change in the situation would imply a change in the cost-benefit structure that everyone would face once he had to make his decisions. Before the introduction of a competitive system of security production, it had been legal to participate in and support (state) aggression. Now such an activity would be illegal. Hence, given one’s conscience, which makes each decision appear more or less costly (i.e., more or less in harmony with one’s own principles of correct behavior), support for a firm engaging in the exploitation of people unwilling to deliberately support its actions would be more costly than before. Given this fact, it must be assumed that the number of people (including even those who otherwise would have readily lent their support to the state) who would now spend their money to support a firm committed to honest business would rise wherever this social experiment was tried. In contrast, the number of people still committed to a policy of exploitation—of gaining at the expense of others—would fall. How drastic this effect would be would of course depend on the state of public opinion. In the example at hand—the United States, where the natural theory of property is extremely widespread and accepted as a private ethic, the libertarian philosophy being essentially the ideology on which the country was founded and that led it to the height it reached[^34]—the effect would naturally be particularly pronounced. Accordingly, security producing firms committed to the philosophy of protecting and enforcing libertarian law would attract the greatest bulk of public support and financial assistance. And while it may be true that some people, and among them especially those who have profited from the old order, might continue their support of a policy of aggression, it is very unlikely that they would be sufficient in number and financial strength to succeed in doing so. Rather, the likely outcome would be that the honest companies would develop the strength needed—alone or in a combined effort and supported in this effort by their own voluntary customers—to check any such emergence of outlaw producers and destroy them wherever and whenever they came into existence.[^35]

[^26]: Sums up Molinari, *Production of Security,* pp. 13–14,

> If … the consumer is not free to buy security wherever he pleases, you forthwith see open up a large profession dedicated to arbitrariness and bad management. Justice becomes slow and costly, the police vexatious, individual liberty is no longer respected, the price of security is abusively inflated and inequitably apportioned, according to the power and influence of this or that class of consumers.

[^27]: See the literature cited in note 22; also Bruno Leoni, *Freedom and the Law* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1961); Joseph Peden, “Property Rights in Celtic Irish Law,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977).

[^28]: See Terry L. Anderson and Peter J. Hill, “The American Experiment in Anarcho-Capitalism: The *Not* So Wild, Wild West,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 1 (1980).

[^29]: On the following, see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1986), chap. 5.

[^30]: Contrast this with the state’s policy of engaging in battles without having everyone’s deliberate support because it has the right to tax people; and ask yourself if the risk of war would be lower or higher if one had the right to stop paying taxes as soon as one had the feeling that the states’ handling of foreign affairs was not to one’s liking.

[^31]: And it may be noted here again that norms that incorporate the highest possible degrees of consensus are, of course, those that are presupposed by argumentation and whose acceptance makes consensus on anything at all possible, as indicated above.

[^32]: Again, contrast this with state-employed judges who, because they are paid from taxes and so are relatively independent of consumer satisfaction, can pass judgments that are clearly not acceptable as fair by everyone; and ask yourself if the risk of not finding the truth in a given case would be lower or higher if one had the possibility of exerting economic pressure whenever one had the feeling that a judge who one day might have to adjudicate in one’s own case had not been sufficiently careful in assembling and judging the facts of a case, or simply was an outright crook.

[^33]: See on the following in particular Rothbard, *For A New Liberty*, pp. 233ff.

[^34]: See Bernard Bailyn, *The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); Jackson Turner Main, *The Anti-Federalists: Critics of the Constitution* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1961); Murray N. Rothbard, *Conceived in Liberty* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1975–1979).

[^35]: Naturally, insurance companies would assume a particularly important role in checking the emergence of outlaw companies. Note Morris and Linda Tannehill (*The Market of Liberty*, pp. 110–11):

> Insurance companies, a very important sector of any totally free economy, would have a special incentive to dissociate themselves from any aggressor and, in addition, to bring all their considerable business influence to bear against him. *Aggressive violence causes value loss*, and the insurance industry would suffer the major cost in most such value losses. An unrestrained aggressor is a walking liability, and no insurance company, however remotely removed from his original aggression, would wish to sustain the risk that he might aggress against one of its own clients next. Besides, aggressors and those who associate with them are more likely to be involved in situations of violence and are, thus, bad insurance risks. An insurance company would probably refuse coverage to such people out of a foresighted desire to minimize any future losses which their aggression might cause. But even if the company were not motivated by such foresight, it would still be forced to rate their premiums up drastically or cancel their coverage altogether in order to avoid carrying the extra risk invoked in their inclination to violence. In a competitive economy, no insurance company could afford to continue covering aggressors and those who had dealings with aggressors and simply pass the cost on to its honest customers; it would soon lose these customers to more reputable firms which could afford to charge less for their insurance coverage.