### El asunto de Fraud II: La Banca de Reserva Fraccional y la Libertad de Contrato

La clasificación de Murray Rothbard’s de la banca de reserva fraccional como un fraude fue el resultado de un largo e intenso estudio sobre la ética y la teoría de los derechos de propiedad en particular. Selgin y White justificadamente veían a la economía como inteletualmente independiente y separada de la ética. Puede ser estudiado sin ningún conocimiento previo de lo que es propiedad y la teoría de los derechos de propiedad. Sin embargo, ellos no dudaban en hacer pronunciamientos éticos profundos. En su defensa moral de la banca de reserva fraccional Selgin y White rara vez mencionaban a la propiedad, mucho menos resaltaban la teoría de la propiedad. Estos tuvo como resultado una serie de errores y problemas fundamentales: confusión sobre la distinción entre propiedad y títulos de propiedad; confusión sobre la (im-)posibilidad de que algo (propiedad) sea poseído simultáneamente por más de un dueño; confusión sobre la prioridad lógica de la propiedad y la teoría de la propiedad en relación con con el contrato y la teoría del contraro; confusión sobre la necesidad de satisfacer las obligaciones contractuales de uno, con la propiedad de uno mismo (no la de cualquiera).

Estas dificultados entran en la discusión del autor sobre el asunto de “la libertad de contrato”. Su argumento es directo.

> Si un banco no representa o expresamente se olbiga a si mismo a mentener reservas del 100 por ciento, entonces las reservas fraccionales no violan el acuerdo contractual entre el banco y sus clientes... . Si se declarase ilegal los acuerdos contractuales voluntarios que permiten mantener las reservas fraccionales, es entonces una intervención en el mercado, una restricción en la libertad de contraro la cual es un aspecto esencial de los derechos de propiedad privada.[^14] 

Este pasaje revela de nuevo el ya notado ultra-subjetivismo de Selgin y White. De acuerdo a este punto de vista, son los acuerdos voluntarios que crean -constituyen y definen- un contrato válido. Sin embargo, los contratos válidos son acuerdos relacionados a la transferia de propiedad real; entonces, el rango de contratos válidos es de hecho principalmente causado por la naturaleza de las cosas y de la propiedad (y solo por acuerdo). Fue entonces que Hoppe (p. 70) explicó que  

> La libertad de contrato no implica que *todos* los contratos mutualmente beneficiosos deberían ser permitidos. La libertad de contrato en cambio consiste en que A y B deberían tener permitido hacer cualquier contrato *siempre que estén relacionados a sus propias propiedades*, sin embargo la banca de reserva fraccional involucra la creación de contratos sobtre la propiedad de terceras partes.[^15] 

Selgin y White se refieren a este cargo de una manera algo confusa como “efectos de las terceras partes” y lo contra-argumentan al cargar a Hoppe con confusión elemental relacionada a la naturaleza de la propiedad y los derechos de propiedad. El estado primero, que 

> salpicaduras por las acciones de otros al *valor* de la propiedad de C ... son un inescapable fenómeno del libre mercado y no una violación de los derechos de propiedad privada de C, [mientras que] una *invasión física* de los derechos de propiedad de C ... es por supuesto algo inconsistente que la protección de los derechos de propiedad de C. Debería de ser obvio que si a A y a B se les prohíbe  de llevar a cabo cualquier transacción que solamente afecte el *valor de mercado* de las posesiones de C, sin ninguna agresión física o amenaza contra C o a su propiedad legítima, entonces los principios de la propiedad privada, la libertad de contrato y la competición de libre mercado son completamente eliminados. ¿Debería de prohibirsele a B ofertar para vender discos compactos lleno de grabaciones a A, simplemente porque al hacer eso se reduce el valor de mercado del inventario de grabaciones en vinilo de C?[^16]

Segundo, ellos mantienen que la reducción del poder adquisitivo del dinero, el cual ellos admiten debe ser resultado de la nueva emisión de medios fiduciarios, es como tal un efecto de valor sin ningún riesgo, y como tal “no provee ninguna justificación para legalmente eliminar la acción del banco”. Entonces, ellos concluyen que el argumento de Hoppe es “inválido” (e incompatible con la teoría de propiedad de Rothbard)

El contrargumento de Selgin y White contiene 2 errores. Primero, mientras que la mayor premisa es correcta, es falso que Hoppe se encuentre equivocado sobre ella. Hoppe estaba escribiendo extensivamente a cerca de la teoría de derechos de propiedad, y no solo está al tanto de la distinción mencionada por Selgin y White, sino que además le provee una defensa praxeológica, así pues, en este asunto no hay diferencia alguna en el criterio entre Rothbard y Hoppe.[^17]

Segungo, la premisa menor es demostradamente falsa (y por lo tanto, la conclusión también). Selgin y White mantienen que la caída en el poder adquisito del dinero que resulta de la emisión de nuevos medios fiduciario es el mismo tipo de evento sin riesgo alguno como lo puede ser la caída del precio de cualquier otra cosa (causada por cambios en la demanda y/o oferta). Los dueños del dinero pierden poder adquisito como resultado de la banca de reserva fraccional, ellos mantienen, no es diferente a la situación en la cual los dueños de las patatas o los carros sufren pérdidas en el valor debido a una mayor oferta o debido a una menor demanda de patatas y carros.

Aquí otra vez, Selgin y White combinan dinero (oro)-eso es, propiedad-y sustituyentes de dinero (notas de banco)-eso es, títulos de propiedad. Para estar seguro, la emisión de medios fiduciarios no conlleva al daño físico de la propiedad real. Después de todo, una nota de banco es solo un pedazo de papel, un papel no ejerce ningún efecto físico relevante en el mundo externo. Pero lo mismo se puede decir sobre la emisión de títulos fiduciarios de patatas o carros (títulos respaldados por bienes diferentes a patatas o carros). Ellos, también, son simplemente pedazos de papel, y como tales no tienen un impacto en el mundo real. Sin embargo, existe una diferencia importante entre los cambios en la posición de la riqueza del dueño de las patatas o los carros causado por cambios en la oferta o la demanda de dichas patatas o carros, y cambios causados por cambios en la oferta y demanda por títulos de cantidades (sin cambiar) de patatas o carros no existentes.Seguramente, los dueños de las patatas o los carros son afectados de manera diferente en ambos casos. En el primer caso, si el precio de las patatas o los carros cae debido a una oferta más grande de patatas o carros, todos los dueños actuales de patatas o carros se mantienen (sin cambiar) en posesión de las mismas cantidades de propiedad (patatas o carros). Ninguna propiedad fìsica es disminuida. De igual manera, si el precio cae porque los compradores de patatas o carros están dispuestos a ofertar solamente cantidades menores de otros productos a cambio de las patatas o carros, esto por sí mismo no tiene efecto alguno en la cantidad física de los dueños actuales de las patatas y los carros. Con un contraste claro en el segundo caso, la emisión y venta de un título adicional para una cantidad de patatas y carros que no ha cambiado *sì* conlleva a una disminución en la cantidad actual de propiedad física de algunos dueños de patatas o carros. No solamente tiene un efecto en el valor: el poder adquisitivo de los títulos sobre las patatas y los carros va a caer. Esto sí tiene un efecto físico: el que emite y vende los títulos fiduciarios de las patatas y los carros se está apropiando indebidamente de las patatas y los carros que le pertenecen a otras personas. Él se apropia de la propiedad de otras personas sin haber renunciado a ninguna de sus propiedades (para intercambiar por el tìtulo de propiedad vacío).[^18]

### The Issue of Fraud III: The "Proof from Existence" Fractional Reserve Banking and State

Neither the title-transfer theory of contract nor the principle of freedom of contract supports the claim that the issue of fiduciary media and fractional reserve banking is ethically justified. To the contrary, only one other argument remains in support of the claim that fractional reserve banking represents a legitimate form of business.

The argument boils down to a proof from existence: X, Y, or Z exists; it would not exist if it were not beneficial; hence, it should exist (and outlawing it would be detrimental and morally wrong).

Thus, write Selgin and White:

> the group [of people] whose freedom of contract we are concerned with here is not a small eccentric bunch, but is the great mass of people who have demonstrated that they do prefer banks that operate on fractional reserves…. Depositors continue to patronize these banks, demonstrating their preference, for them.[^19]
> 
> … By the principle of demonstrated preference depositors must be presumed to benefit from the package they have agreed to accept, risk and all.[^20]
> 
> \[Consequently,\] \[if\] *any* person knowingly prefers to put money into an (interest-bearing) fractional-reserve account, rather than into a (storage-fee-charging) 100 percent reserve account, then a blanket prohibition on fractional-reserve banking by force of law is a binding legal restriction on freedom of contact in the market for banking services.[^21]
> 
> [Moreover,] … [b]enefits accrue to bank depositors and noteholders, who receive interest and services paid for by the extra bank revenue generated from lending out a portion of its liabilities. Benefits accrue to bank borrowers who enjoy a more ample supply of intermediated credit, and to everyone who works with the economy’s consequently larger stock of capital equipment. And benefits must accrue to bank shareholders, who could choose to have the bank not issue demand liabilities if they found the risks not worth bearing.[^22]

Selgin and White have here put the cart before the horse. The existence of a practice, however widespread, has no bearing on the question of whether it is justifiable or not. Consider first, for illustrative purposes, the following analogy concerning the ethical permissibility of a state, that is, of a territorial monopolist of law and order (or of justice and protection).[^23]

In the words of Selgin and White (applied here in a different context and paraphrased), the group of people whose freedom of contract we are concerned with is not a small eccentric bunch, but is the great mass of people who have demonstrated that they do prefer states (judges and protectors) that operate on a monopolistic basis. Territorial inhabitants continue to patronize these states, demonstrating their preference for them. By the principle of demonstrated preference, territorial inhabitants must be presumed to benefit from the package they have agreed to accept, risk and all. Consequently, if any person knowingly prefers to put money into a tax-bearing state account, rather than into a protection-fee-charging account in nontaxing justice and protection agencies, then a blanket prohibition on state-formation by force of law is a binding legal restriction on freedom of contract in the market for justice and protection services. Moreover, benefits accrue to state depositors and noteholders, who receive interest and services paid for by the extra state revenue generated from employing parts of the deposits for extra tax collections. Benefits accrue to state borrowers who enjoy a more ample supply of intermediated credit, and to everyone who works with the economy’s consequently larger stock of capital equipment. And benefits must accrue to state shareholders, who could choose to have the state not engage in taxation if they found the risks not worth taking.

Given their own libertarian credentials, Selgin and White would presumably reject this analogy as false and inappropriate. But if so, why? What is it that invalidates the second *proof*, but not the first? What if anything, makes a blanket prohibition (or permission) of fractional reserve banking categorically different from a blanket prohibition (or permission) of state formation and operation?

The answer—that no such difference exists and that both proofs are equally invalid—is to be found in the Rothbardian principle of demonstrated preference. While Selgin and White invoke this principle in support of their conclusion regarding the ethical permissibility of fractional reserve banking, they miss its implication. The principle of demonstrated preference, as explained by Rothbard in his celebrated “Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics,” *presupposes* property rights. Not all demonstrated preferences are ethically permissible or socially beneficial. Instead, the only such preferences that are permissible and welfare enhancing are these that are expressed by means of one’s own property and nothing but one’s own property. Every preference demonstration by means of property other than one’s own—with other people’s property—is impermissible and nonbeneficial.

As for the demonstrated preference for states, it runs afoul of Rothbard’s principle. In Rothbard’s analysis, which is presumably accepted by the participants on both sides of the current debate, the violation can be quickly pinpointed. Private property, as the result of acts of (original) appropriation and/or production, implies the owner’s right to exclusive jurisdiction regarding his property, including the right to employ this property in defense against possible invasions and invaders. Indeed, there can be no property without an owner’s right to physical defense, and it is the very purpose of private property to establish separate domains of exclusive jurisdiction. No private-property owner can possibly surrender his right to ultimate jurisdiction over and defense of his property to someone else—unless he sells or otherwise transfers his property (in which case someone else would have exclusive jurisdiction over it). That is, so long as something (a good) has not been abandoned, its owner must be presumed as retaining these rights; and as far as his relations to others are concerned, every property owner may then only partake in the advantages of the division of labor and seek better and improved protection of his unalterable property rights through cooperation with other owners of property. Every property owner can buy from, sell to, or otherwise contract with everyone else concerning supplemental property protection and security services. Yet each owner also may at any time unilaterally discontinue any such cooperation with others. In distinct contrast, a territorial monopoly of protection and jurisdiction—a state—implies that every property owner is prohibited from discontinuing his cooperation with his protector, and that no one (except the monopolist) may exercise ultimate jurisdiction over his own property. Rather, everyone except the monopolist has lost his right to defense and is thus rendered defenseless vis-à-vis his own protector. Obviously, such an institution stands in contradiction to every owner’s demonstrated preference of not giving up his property. Contrary to their demonstrated preference, the monopolist prohibits the people from using their property in physical defense against possible invasions by himself and his agents. A monopoly of protection and jurisdiction rests thus from the outset on an impermissible act of expropriation (taxation) and provides the monopolist and his agents with a license to further expropriation and taxation. Every owner’s range of permissible actions regarding his own property, and hence the value of his property, is diminished, whereas the monopolist’s range of action and control is correspondingly enlarged and his exclusive privilege is reflected in an increase in the value of his property (capitalization of monopoly profit).

Presently, states exist everywhere, and almost everyone resides under state *protection*. Regardless of this preference demonstration, however, there is nothing wrong, ethically or economically, with blanket protection against state formation. No one may form a state, for the same reason that no one may expropriate or rob anyone else. In a court of law, it would be sufficient that a single property owner objected to the monopoly’s existence, and the monopolist would have to cease in his current operation as a tax-yielding protection agency and be repaired to the legal status of a nontaxing but fee-charging law-and-security agency (a normal specialized firm). A tax-yielding protection agency is a contradiction in terms—an invasive protector—and must be forbidden, irrespective of any benefits accruing to state depositors, state borrowers, and state owners. To do so is not a legal restriction on freedom of contract in the market for justice and protection services, but the very presupposition of freedom of contract and justice. Everyone putting money or any other resources into a tax-yielding protection account is engaged in unlawful action and subject to punishment.

Just as states exist everywhere, so do fractional reserve banks, and nowadays practically everyone is banking with fractional reserve banks. What, if anything, is the difference between the status of a state and that of a fractional reserve bank? Why should fractional reserve banks not be outlaw banks just as states outlaw protection agencies? To be sure, just as there can be no doubt concerning a demand for protection services, there can also be no doubt as to a demand for banking services. Yet the demand for protection services that private property owners may properly demonstrate does not include a demand for tax-yielding protection services, as we have seen. It exclusively permits a demand for fee-charging protection agencies. Why should an analogous distinction not be true also for banking services? Why should a demand for interest-yielding demand deposit accounts not be just as impermissible as the demand for tax-yielding protection accounts, on the ground that both interest-yielding deposit accounts and tax-yielding property protection are contradictions in terms? Why should the functions of a money warehouser and clearing institution (100-percent-reserve-deposit banking) and as an intermediary of credit (savings-and-loan banking) not be the only just forms of banking (just as fee-charging protection agencies are the only legitimate form of protection)?

[^14]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 87.

[^15]: Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?”, p. 70.

[^16]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 92–93.

[^17]: For instance, Hans-Hermann Hoppe (“From the Economics of Laissez-Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. [Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988], pp. 69ff.); and White’s review of Hoppe (Lawrence White, “Review of *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard,*” *Journal of Economic Literature* (June 1990): 664–65).

[^18]: Also see note 7 above. We will also show that these authors’ meaning of demand for (and supply of) money is misconceived. An increased demand for money (or potatoes or cars) is not just a wish to have more money (or potatoes), but greater *effective* demand.

[^19]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 95.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 93.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 88.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 94.

[^23]: To avoid any misunderstanding, the term monopoly is employed here in its Rothbardian definition as an exclusive privilege (or the absence of free entry). A monopoly of law and order means that one may turn for justice and protection only to one party—the state—and that it is exclusively this party that determines the content of justice and protection.
