## The Economics and Sociology of Taxation

As the title of the chapter indicates, I have set myself two goals. First, I want to explain the general economic effect of taxation. This part of the chapter represents a praxeological analysis of taxation and as such should not be expected to go much beyond what has already been said by other economists.

More originality might be found in the second part, where I will try to answer the question: why is there taxation; and why is there always more of it? Answering such questions is not the task of economic theory but of praxeologically informed and constrained sociological or historical interpretations and reconstructions, and from the very outset much more room for speculation in this field of intellectual inquiry exists.

## #

To say there is nothing new to be stated regarding the economic effects of taxation is not to say that what there *is* would not be news to many. In fact, after surveying several popular economics textbooks it would seem that what I have to say is news to most of today’s economists and students of economics. Insofar as these texts deal with the economic effects of taxation at all, beyond a purely descriptive presentation of various tax-schemes and their historical development[^1], they are almost completely silent on the question of what the general effects of taxation are. Moreover, what in their discussion of the problem of tax-incidence these texts then say about the economic effects of specific forms of taxation is invariably flawed.

However, this state of affairs merely reflects a process of intellectual degeneration. As early as 150 years ago almost everything that should be understood today about the economics of taxation had been correctly and convincingly stated by such a prominent figure in the history of economics as Jean Baptiste Say in his *Treatise on Political Economy*.

In contrast to today’s textbook writers, who assign the discussion of taxation to arbitrary places within the overall architectonic of their books, from the beginning Say correctly locates the phenomenon under the general heading “Of the Consumption of Wealth.”

He then unmistakenly identifies and explains taxation as an attack on and punishment of the acquisition and production of property, which necessarily leads to a reduction in the formation of wealth embodied in such property and to a lowering of the general standard of living.

Notes Say:

> It is a glaring absurdity to pretend, that taxation contributes to national wealth, by engrossing part of the national produce, and enriches the nation by consuming part of its wealth.[^2]
> 
> Taxation is the transfer of a portion of the national products from the hands of individuals to those of the government, for the purpose of meeting public consumption or expenditure. Sea cual sea la explicación que tenga, ya sea de impuestos especiales o no, contribuciones, aranceles, aduanas, ayudas, subsidios, donaciones u obsequios, es relativamente una carga impuesta a los individuos, ya sea en un carácter individual o corporativo, por el poder gobernante que esté en ese momento, para así suministrar el consumo que se piense debe hacerse a su costa; en resumen, una imposta, literalmente. [^3]

Since such fundamental insights seem to have been forgotten, or at least no longer appear obvious today, let me, as my first task, present anew a praxeological account and explanation for Say’s central argument and its validity, and in so doing refute some popular “counterarguments” claiming to show that taxation need not obstruct the formation of property and wealth. In light of this general explanation, I will then demonstrate the fundamental logical fallacy in the standard textbook analysis of tax-incidence.

That taxation—foremost and above all—is and must be understood as a means for the destruction of property and wealth-formation follows from a simple logical analysis of the meaning of taxation.

Taxation is a coercive, non-contractual transfer of definite physical assets (nowadays mostly, but not exclusively money), and the value embodied in them, from a person or group of persons who first held these assets and who could have derived an income from further holding them, to another, who now possesses them and now derives an income from so doing. How did these assets come into the hands of their original owners? Dando por hecho que esto fue por otro acto pago de impuestos anterior, y sabiendo que sólo esos activos pueden ser cobrados como impuestos, que aún no se han consumido, o que su valor aún no se ha agotado por actos de consumo (un recaudador de impuestos lleva ¡La basura de otro hombre, sino sus activos valiosos!), existen tres y solamente tres posibilidades: Entran en nuestra posesión al percibir ciertos bienes dados por la naturaleza como escasos y haberlos obtenido antes que nadie más los haya visto o hecho; Haberlos producido mediante el trabajo de uno, con bienes previamente asignados; O mediante la adquisición por voluntad propia y contractual, de un apropiador o productor anterior. Only through these types of activities is one capable of acquiring and increasing valuable—and hence taxable—assets. Un acto de apropiación original convierte algo que nadie había visto previamente, en una posible fuente de ingresos de un activo que proporciona ingresos; los actos de producción están por su propia naturaleza dirigidos a la conversión de un activo menos valioso en uno más valioso; y los intercambios contractuales tienen que ver con el cambio y la redirección de estos activos de las manos de aquellos que valoran menos su posesión, a aquellos que los valoran más.

From this it follows that any form of taxation implies a reduction of income a person can expect to receive from original appropriation, from production, or from contracting. Since these activities require the employment of scarce means—at least time and the use of one’s body—which could be used for consumption and/or leisure, the opportunity cost of performing them is raised. The marginal utility of appropriating, producing, and contracting is decreased, and the marginal utility of consumption and leisure increased. Accordingly, there will be a tendency to shift out of the former roles and into the latter ones.[^4]

Thus, by coercively transferring valuable, not yet consumed assets from their producers (in the wider sense of the term including appropriators and contractors) to people who have not produced them, taxation reduces producers’ present income and their presently possible level of consumption. Moreover, it reduces the present incentive for future production of valuable assets and thereby also lowers future income and the future level of available consumption. Taxation is not just a punishment of consumption without any effect on productive efforts; it is also an assault on production as the only means of providing for and possibly increasing future income and consumption expenditure. Al bajar el valor asociado presente de los esfuerzos dirigidos al futuro productivos de valor, la tasa de impuestos aumenta la tasa efectiva de preferencia temporal, o sea, la tasa de interés originaria y, por este motivo, se conduce a un acortamiento del período de la producción y del suministro, y así se ejerce una fuerte influencia para empujar a la humanidad hacia la existencia de vivir "de la mano a la boca". Just increase taxation enough, and you will have mankind reduced to the level of barbaric animal beasts.

Straightforward as such reasoning may seem, there are a number of popular objections raised against it. Para dar un ejemplo, desde la perspectiva de los economistas que ven falsamente la economía como una ciencia empírica, que no hace sino producir explicaciones hipotéticas, que invariablemente se deben probar en contraste con la evidencia empírica para poder ser validadas (análoga a las ciencias naturales), el siguiente argumento es escuchado con frecuencia: empíricamente, se ha observado múltiples veces que un aumento en el nivel de los impuestos, está acompañado de un aumento (y no una caída) del PNB u otras medidas de producto productivo; por lo que, el razonamiento anterior, por creíble este sea, debe considerarse empíricamente inválido. In fact, some empiricists of this sort go even further and make the stronger claim that taxation actually helps increase the standard of living as evidenced by the fact that some countries with once low standards of living and low levels of taxation now enjoy a much greater wealth with much higher taxes.

Both objections are simply confused. La experiencia no vence a la lógica, y las interpretaciones que evidencian lo observado, que no están en línea con las leyes del razonamiento lógico, son más bien el signo de una mente confusa (o uno aceptaría la evidencia observada de alguien que ha visto un pájaro rojo y no rojo, al mismo tiempo, como una refutación de la ley de la contradicción, en vez de la declaración de un tonto?).

As regards the stronger thesis, it is nothing but a beautiful illustration of the ever so attractive *post hoc ergo propter hoc* fallacy. From the fact that the correlated events of high taxation and wealth were to be observed later than those of low taxation and wealth it is inferred that increased taxation increases wealth. Yet to reason in this way is about as convincing as the argument—justly ridiculed by Say—that one can observe rich men consuming more than poor ones; therefore, their high level of consumption must be responsible for the fact that they are rich.[^5] De la misma manera se deduce del significado del consumo que esto es imposible y que, al contrario, los ricos no son ricos debido a su alto nivel de consumo, sino porque antes se abstuvieron de consumir y se dedicaron en cambio a hacer cosas productivas y de valor, a lo que se deduce que por altos impuestos la humanidad no pudo haber prosperado, a pesar de ese hecho.

The weaker thesis—that experience would at least disprove any claim of a relationship between taxation and productive output that was negative by necessity—is also off the mark. El razonamiento praxeológico, mostrado anteriormente, no deja por fuera en absoluto a lo que los economistas empiristas interpretan erróneamente como una refutación. In this earlier discussion the conclusion had been reached that the effect of taxation is a relative reduction in the production of valuable assets—a reduction, that is, as compared with the level of output that would have been produced had there been no taxation at all or had the level of taxation not been raised. Nothing was said or implied with respect to the absolute level of the output of valuable assets. As a matter of fact, absolute growth of GNP, for instance, is not only compatible with our earlier praxeological analysis, but can even be seen as a perfectly normal phenomenon to the extent that advances in productivity are possible and actually take place. If it has become possible through improvements in the technology of production to produce a higher output with an identical input (in terms of cost), or a physically identical output with a reduced input, then the coincidence of increased taxation and an increased output of valuable assets is anything but surprising. However, this does not in the least affect the validity of what has been stated about relative impoverishment resulting from taxation. With a given state of technological knowledge, though it may change over time, and taxation being what it is (a punishment of value-productive efforts), the level of productive output must be lower than the one that could have been attained with the same knowledge and no or lower taxation. Statistical studies here are entirely beside the point: they can neither help strengthen it, nor can they ever be used to weaken it.

Otro argumento teórico que goza de cierta popularidad, es que el obligar o aumentar los impuestos, conduce a una reducción de los ingresos derivados de los activos que pagan impuestos; que esta reducción aumenta la utilidad de tales activos comparados con lo que puede derivar de otras formas de actividad; y así, en lugar de disminuirlo, los impuestos realmente ayudan a aumentar la dedicación a la producción. For the usual case of taxing money assets this is to say that taxes reduce monetary income which raises the marginal utility of money, and this in turn increases the incentive to attain monetary returns. Este argumento es completamente cierto sin duda. However, it is a misconception to believe that it does anything to invalidate the relative impoverishment thesis that I have advanced. Primero que todo, para mantener un registro correcto, se debe señalar que incluso aún siendo cierto, como parece sugerir el argumento recién presentado, aunque erróneamente como ya veremos, el aumento de los impuestos no conduce a una producción relativamente menor de activos valiosos producidos, porque estimule el aumento proporcional en la adicción al trabajo, sino que sigue siendo un caso de ingreso de individuos con un valor productivo disminuido. Even if they produce the same output as previously, they can only do so if they expend more labor now than before. Since any additional labor expenditure implies forgone leisure or consumption (leisure or consumption which they otherwise could have enjoyed along with the same output of valuable assets), their overall standard of living must be lower.[^6]

It now becomes apparent why the assumption that taxation can leave the productive output of valuable assets unaffected and exclusively cripple consumption is fatally flawed. Si el pago de impuestos reduce el ingreso (el cual incluye un derivado de consumo presente además del ocio), y por el hecho universal de la preferencia del tiempo, es decir, que las personas sin dudas prefieren los bienes presentes a los bienes futuros (lo cual no pueden hacer sin consumir continuamente, y pueden en métodos de producción más extensos e indirectos, sólo si se hace una provisión de bienes de consumo para ese período de espera), entonces obligatoriamente se deduce que la tasa efectiva de tiempo de una persona, debe haberse mediante este mismo acto (en el desuso de que la espera debe haber aumentado), y además tendrá que reducir la duración de la estructura de producción, si se compara con la que de otro modo, se habría elegido. Accordingly, his output of valuable assets available at future dates will have to be lower than would be the case otherwise. If with lower or no taxation his income had been higher and his time preference schedule being given (whatever it happens to be at any particular point in time), he would have invested in lengthier production processes. As a consequence, his output of valuable future assets would have been relatively greater.[^7]

The error in the thesis that taxation can have a neutral effect on production lies in the fact that time preference is not taken into account. The argument presently under scrutiny is quite correct in pointing out that taxation implies a twofold signal: on the one hand the substitution effect working in favor of consumption and leisure and against work; and on the other hand the income effect of raising the marginal utility of the taxed asset. Así que es falso entender esto de una manera simplista, como una mezcla de señales que se contradicen, una a favor y otra en contra del trabajo, de modo que uno no puede decir nada de naturaleza exacta al referirse a los efectos de del cobro de impuestos a la producción, y la cuestión de si, o no, la imposición de una producción más baja o más alta de activos de valor se debe concebir como del todo empírica. [^8] For in fact, the signal of taxation is not contradictory at all once it has been recognized that it is being sent to persons whose actions are invariably constrained by time preference. For such actors there exists not only the alternative between work and no work at all but also one between producing a valuable asset in more or less time-consuming ways. Sin otro remedio, deben también escoger entre obtener un activo rápida y directamente, con su correspondiente tiempo de espera, pero con el costo de tener que usar métodos de producción menos eficientes (el famoso pescador que decide usar sus propias manos para atrapar peces, para ir más rápidamente evitando pasar por métodos de producción indirectos), o sino obtenerlo por métodos más productivos, pero teniendo que esperar más tiempo para obtener frutos (el pescador que queriendo mayores ganancias futuras, decide aguantar un tiempo más largo y crea una red). Así que, teniendo estas opciones, el mensaje sobre el pago de impuestos es completamente inequívoco, y ya no puede haber dudas de que se debe tomar en cuenta el efecto de sustitución sistemática cualquier efecto del ingreso: Si no solo existe la opción de tener algo o no tenerlo, sino de tener menos de algo antes o más de este más tarde, el doble discurso que se envía a través de los impuestos, se integra fácilmente y se traduce en esto: Reducir tiempo de espera; acortar métodos de producción indirectos! By doing so, valuable assets will be obtained earlier—in line with their increased marginal utility. Al mismo tiempo, al recortar el período de espera, se le dará más espacio al ocio, en la línea con su mayor utilidad marginal. By reducing the length of roundabout methods of production the two seemingly contradictory signals stemming from taxation are simultaneously accounted for. Contrary to any claim of a systematically “neutral” effect of taxation on production, the consequence of any such shortening of roundabout methods of production is a lower output produced. The price that invariably must be paid for taxation, and for every increase in taxation, is a coercively lowered productivity that in turn reduces the standard of living in terms of valuable assets provided for future consumption. Every act of taxation necessarily exerts a push away from more highly capitalized, more productive production processes in the direction of a hand-to-mouth-existence.

[^1]: Exclusively descriptive analyses of taxation are given, for instance, by Paul Samuelson, *Economics*, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), chap. 9; Roger L. Miller, *Economics Today*, 6th ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), chap. 6.

[^2]: Jean Baptiste Say, *A Treatise on Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1964), pp. 446–47.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 446; on Say’s economic analysis of taxation see also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (Fall, 1981), esp. pp. 551–54.

[^4]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), chap. 12.8; idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 4, 1–3.

[^5]: See Say, A Treatise on Political Economy, p. 448.

[^6]: See on this point also Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 95f.

[^7]: One might object here that the tax receipts will come into someone’s hands—those of government officials or of governmental transfer-paymentrecipients—and that their increased income, resulting in a lower effective time preference rate for them, may offset the increase in this rate on the taxpayers’ side and hence leave the overall rate and the structure of production unchanged. Such reasoning, however, is categorically flawed: For one thing, insofar as government expenditure is concerned, it cannot be regarded as investment at all. Rather, it is consumption, and consumption alone. For, as Rothbard has explained,

> [i]n any sort of division-of-labor economy, capital goods are built, not for their own sake by the investor, but in order to use them to produce lower-order and eventually consumers’ goods. In short, a characteristic of an investment expenditure is that the good in question is not being used to fulfill the needs of the investor, but of someone else—the consumer. Yet, when government confiscates resources from the private market economy, it is precisely defying the wishes of the consumers; when government invests in any good, it does so to serve the whims of government officials, not the desires of consumers. (*Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 816–17)

Thus, government expenditure, by definition, cannot be conceived of as lengthening the production structure and hence as counterbalancing the taxpayers’ raised time preference rate.—On the other hand,

> as for the *transfer* expenditures made by the government (including the salaries of bureaucrats and subsidies to privileged groups), it is true that some of this will be saved and invested. These investments, however, will not represent the voluntary desires of consumers, but rather investments in fields of production *not* desired by the *producing* consumers…. Once let the tax be eliminated, and … the new investments called forth by the demands of the specially privileged will turn out to be *malinvestments*. (*Power and Market*, p. 98)

Consequently, transfer expenditures also cannot be conceived of as compensating for the fact that taxpayers shorten the length of the production structure. All such expenditures can do is to lengthen the structure of mal-production. “At any rate” concludes Rothbard,

> the amount consumed by the government insures that the effect of income taxation will be to raise time-preference ratios and to reduce saving and investment. (Ibid., p. 98)

[^8]: See for such—irrelevant—empirical studies regarding the relative importance of income vs. substitution effects George F. Break, “The Incidence and Economic Effects of Taxation,” in *The Economics of Public Finance* (Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1974), pp. 180ff.; A.B. Atkinson and Joseph E. Stiglitz, *Lectures on Public Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1980), pp. 48ff.; Stiglitz, *Economics of the Public Sector* (New York: Norton, 1986), p. 372.