## Socialismo: ¿un problema de propiedad o conocimiento?

### 

En una serie de artículos recientes en la * Review of Austrian Economics *, Joseph Salerno comenzó a des-homogeneizar las teorías económicas y sociales a menudo combinadas de Ludwig von Mises y Friedrich A. Hayek. En particular, ha demostrado que sus puntos de vista sobre el socialismo son claramente diferentes, y ha argumentado en efecto que el argumento original de Mises en el llamado debate del cálculo socialista fue correcto todo el tiempo y también fue la última palabra, mientras que la contribución distintiva de Hayek a el debate fue falaz desde el principio y simplemente añadió confusión. La siguiente nota proporcionará un apoyo adicional a la tesis de Salerno.

El argumento de cálculo ya bien conocido de Mises dice lo siguiente: si no hay una propiedad privada en la tierra y otros factores de producción, tampoco puede haber precios de mercado para ellos. Por lo tanto, el cálculo económico, por ejemplo, la comparación de los ingresos anticipados y el costo esperado expresado en términos de un medio de intercambio común (que permite * operaciones contables cardinales *), es literalmente imposible. El error fatal del socialismo es la ausencia de propiedad privada en la tierra y los factores de producción, y por implicación, la ausencia de cálculo económico.

Para Hayek, el problema del socialismo no es la falta de propiedad sino la falta de conocimiento. Su tesis distintiva es completamente diferente de la de Mises. [^1] Para Hayek, el defecto último del socialismo es el hecho de que el conocimiento, en particular "el conocimiento de las circunstancias particulares de tiempo y lugar", existe solo en una forma ampliamente dispersa como la posesión personal de varios individuos; por lo tanto, es * prácticamente * imposible ensamblar y procesar todo el conocimiento realmente existente en la mente de un único planificador central socialista. La solución de Hayek no es la propiedad privada, sino la descentralización del uso del conocimiento.

Sin embargo, esta es sin duda una tesis absurda. Primero, si el uso centralizado del conocimiento es el problema, entonces es difícil explicar por qué hay familias, clubes y empresas, y por qué no enfrentan los mismos problemas que el socialismo. Las familias y las empresas también involucran planificación central. El jefe de la familia y el dueño de la empresa también hacen planes que vinculan el uso que otras personas pueden hacer de sus conocimientos privados, sin embargo, las familias y las empresas no comparten los problemas del socialismo. Para Mises, esta observación no plantea ninguna dificultad: en el socialismo la propiedad privada está * ausente *, mientras que las familias individuales y las empresas privadas están * basadas * en la misma * institución * de propiedad privada. Sin embargo, para Hayek el funcionamiento sin problemas de las familias y las empresas es desconcertante porque su idea de una sociedad totalmente descentralizada es aquella en la que cada persona toma sus propias decisiones basándose en su propio conocimiento de las circunstancias, sin ningún plan central o norma (como la institución de la propiedad privada) supraindividual (social).

En segundo lugar, si el * desideratum * es meramente el uso descentralizado del conocimiento en la sociedad, entonces es difícil explicar por qué los problemas del socialismo son fundamentalmente diferentes de los encontrados por cualquier otra forma de organización social. * Cada * organización humana, compuesta de individuos distintos, utiliza constante e inevitablemente el conocimiento descentralizado. En el socialismo, el conocimiento descentralizado se utiliza no menos que en empresas privadas u hogares. Como en una empresa, existe un plan central bajo socialismo, y dentro de las limitaciones de este plan, los trabajadores socialistas y los empleados de la empresa utilizan su propio conocimiento descentralizado de las circunstancias de tiempo y lugar para implementar y ejecutar el plan. Para Mises, todo esto está completamente al margen. Dentro del marco analítico de Hayek, no existe ninguna diferencia entre el socialismo y una corporación privada. Por lo tanto, no pueden haber más errores con el socialismo que con una empresa privada.

Claramente, la tesis de Hayek con respecto al problema central del socialismo es absurda. Lo que distingue categóricamente al socialismo de las empresas y las familias es la * no * existencia de conocimiento centralizado o la falta de uso del conocimiento descentralizado, sino más bien la ausencia de propiedad privada y, por lo tanto, de precios. De hecho, en referencias ocasionales a Mises y su argumento de cálculo original, Hayek a veces parece darse cuenta de esto también. Pero fracasa en su intento de integrar su propia tesis con la de Mises y, por lo tanto, proporcionar una síntesis teórica nueva y superior.

La síntesis Hayekiana consiste en la siguiente conjunción proposicional: "Fundamentalmente, en un sistema en el que el conocimiento de los hechos relevantes se dispersa entre muchas personas, los precios pueden actuar para coordinar las acciones separadas de diferentes personas" y "el sistema de precios" puede servir como "un mecanismo para comunicar información". [^2] Mientras que la segunda parte de esta proposición lo llama a uno vagamente como misesiano, no está nada claro cómo se relaciona lógicamente con el primero, excepto a través de la elusiva asociación de Hayek de "Precios" con "información" y "conocimiento". Sin embargo, esta asociación es más un truco semántico que una argumentación rigurosa. Por un lado, es inofensivo hablar de precios como la información que transmite. Informan sobre las relaciones de intercambio pasadas, pero no es necesario concluir que el problema central del socialismo es la falta de * conocimiento *. Esto solo seguiría si los precios en realidad * fueran * información. Sin embargo, este no es el caso. Los precios transmiten conocimiento, pero son las relaciones de intercambio de diversos bienes, que resultan de las interacciones voluntarias de individuos distintos * basados en la institución de la propiedad privada *. Sin la institución de la propiedad privada, la información transmitida por los precios simplemente no existe. La propiedad privada es la condición necesaria - * die Bedingung der Möglichkeit * - del conocimiento comunicado a través de los precios. Sin embargo, es correcto concluir, como lo hace Mises, que la ausencia de la institución de la propiedad privada constituye el problema del socialismo. Afirmar que el problema es la falta de conocimiento, como lo hace Hayek, es confundir causa y efecto, o premisa y consecuencia.

Por otro lado, la identificación de Hayek de "precios" y "conocimiento" implica una equivocación engañosa. Not only does Hayek fail to distinguish between what one might call institutional knowledge—information that requires for its existence an institution (such as the knowledge of prices requires private property)—and *raw or extra-institutional knowledge*—such as this is an oak tree, I like peanuts, or birds can fly. Moreover, Hayek fails to notice that the knowledge of prices is not at all the same sort of knowledge whose existence he believes to be responsible for the “practical impossibility” of socialism and central planning. What makes central planning impossible, according to Hayek, is the fact that part of human knowledge exists only as essentially *private* information:

> practically every individual has some advantage over all others because he possesses unique information of which beneficial use might be made, but of which use can be made only if the decisions depending on it are left to him or are made with his active co-operation.[^3]

While it is certainly true that such knowledge exists, and while it is also true that uniquely private knowledge can never be centralized (without information losses), it is just as certainly *not* true that the knowledge of prices falls into this category of uniquely *private* information. To be sure, prices are “prices paid at specific times and places,” but this does not make them private information in the Hayekian sense. To the contrary, the information conveyed by *prices* is *public* information, because prices—*qua* objective exchange ratios—are *real* events. It may be *difficult* to know all of the prices paid at a specified date and location, just as it may be difficult to know every person’s physical location at any given time. Yet it is hardly *impossible* to know either one, and with current computer technology it is probably easy. In any case, while I may never know everything that you know, and *vice versa*, it is no more problematic to assume that both of us can simultaneously possess the same *price* information than that we can both simultaneously know the same baseball results. Hence, the knowledge conveyed by prices actually *can be centralized*. However, if price information is public information and thus can be centralized, then, according to Hayek’s thesis that socialism’s problem stems from the inefficiency of trying to centralize genuinely uncentralizable private knowledge, it would follow that the absence of prices, and hence of private property has *nothing to do* with the plight of socialism. Otherwise, if one insists with Mises that the absence of private property, and prices *does* have something to do with the plight of socialism, Hayek’s contribution to the socialism debate must be discarded as false, confusing, and irrelevant.

Hayek’s misconception of the nature of socialism is symptomatic of a fundamental flaw in his thinking, pervading not only his economics but in particular also his political philosophy: his ultra-subjectivism. Hayek, as noted and quoted *ad nauseam* by his numerous followers, was convinced that “it is probably no exaggeration to say that every important advance in economic theory during the last hundred years was a further step in the consistent application of subjectivism.”[^4] While this may well be true, it does not logically follow that every further advance toward subjectivism must also lead to an advance in economic theory. However, Hayek seems to have drawn this conclusion and has thus become a prime example illustrating its falsehood.

Mises, and in his steps even more clearly Murray N. Rothbard, conceives of economics as the science of human *action*. Action has two inseparable aspects: a subjective aspect (action is rational, intelligible action) and an objective aspect (acting is always acting with real things and physical stuff). Accordingly, Mises’s and Rothbard’s economics and political philosophy is never anything but robust, and their categories and theories invariably possess real, operational meaning: private property, division of labor based on private property, production, direct and indirect exchange, and compulsory interference with private property and production and exchange such as taxation, counterfeiting, legislation, and regulation.

In distinct contrast, Hayek—and misled by him to different degrees also Israel Kirzner and Ludwig Lachmann—views economics as some sort of science of human *knowledge*. Accordingly, Hayek’s categories and theories refer to purely subjective phenomena and are invariably elusive or even illusory. He is not concerned about acting with things but about knowledge and ignorance, the division, dispersion, and diffusion of knowledge, alertness, discovery, learning, and the coordination and divergence of plans and expectations. The external (physical) world and real (material) events have almost completely disappeared from his view. Hayek’s categories refer to *mental* states of affairs and relationships, completely detached from and compatible with *any* real physical state of affairs and events.

Most notable and disturbing is the ultra-subjectivist turn in Hayek’s political philosophy. According to a long-standing tradition of political philosophy shared by Mises and Rothbard, freedom is defined as the freedom to privately own and control real property, and coercion is the initiation of physical damage upon the private property of others. In distinct contrast, Hayek defines freedom as “a state in which each can use his own *knowledge* and for his own *purposes*,”[^5] and coercion means “such control of the environment or circumstances of a person by another that, in order to avoid greater evil, he is forced to act not according to a coherent plan of his own but to serve the *ends* of another,”[^6] or alternatively, “coercion occurs when one man’s actions are made to serve another man’s will, not for his own but for the other’s *purpose*”[^7] (all emphases mine). Clearly, Hayek’s definition contains no reference to scarce goods and real tangible property, and provides no *physical* criterion or indicator whatsoever for the existence or nonexistence of either state of affairs. Rather coercion and freedom refer to specific configurations of subjective wills, plans, thoughts, or expectations. As *mental* predicates, Hayek’s definitions of freedom and coercion are compatible with every *real*, physical state of affairs.[^8]

It is beyond the scope of this note to offer a detailed critique and refutation of Hayek’s ultra-subjectivism. However, in addition to the fundamental question whether a science of knowledge as envisioned by Hayek is even possible (i.e., whether there can be any other science of knowledge apart from logic and epistemology on the one hand and the history of ideas on the other),[^9] two conclusions are painfully clear. Even if Hayek’s science of knowledge is possible, it appears at best irrelevant because it is praxeologically meaningless. At worst it is intellectually pernicious in promoting relativism.

As for the real world of acting with physical property, of production and exchange, of money and markets, of profits and losses, of capital accumulation and of bankruptcies, there can be no lasting doubt about the existence of *laws* and the ceaseless operation of a *tendency* toward general equilibrium (action-coordination). Likewise, there can be no doubt about the existence of laws and the constant operation of dis-equilibrating tendencies within the world of actual taxation, counterfeiting, legislation, and regulation. Indeed, it would be extremely costly, even prohibitive, to not recognize such laws and tendencies and to adopt relativistic views. In contrast, in surreptitiously shifting attention from the tangible world of action and property to the ethereal world of knowledge, ideas, plans and expectations, relativistic views become attractive and cheap. There are no apparent regularities and tendencies in Hayek’s knowledge world. In fact, it is difficult to even imagine what “law” and “equilibrium” could possibly mean in the context of purely subjective phenomena. Instead there appears to exist nothing but constant kaleidoscopic change.

It is hardly surprising then that Hayek and his followers could proclaim such relativistic slogans as that we cannot do anything to improve our condition except rely on spontaneous evolution, that our future is completely unknowable, or that we cannot but participate in an endless and open-ended stream of conversation. As far as the realm of purely subjective phenomena is concerned and as addressed to a purely spiritual disembodied being, this may well be good advice. However, why would anyone with a bodily existence even care? As applied to the world of bodily action and property, such advice is self-destructive nonsense.

[^1]: See in particular the widely acclaimed 1945 article, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” reprinted in F.A. Hayek, *Individualism and Economic Order* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948).

[^2]: Ibid., pp. 85–86.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 80.

[^4]: F.A. Hayek, *The Counterrevolution of Science* (New York: Free Press, 1955), p. 21.

[^5]: F.A. Hayek, *Law, Legislation, and Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973), vol. 1, pp. 55–56.

[^6]: F.A. Hayek, *The Constitution of Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), pp. 20–21.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 133.

[^8]: See also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Hayek on Government and Social Evolution,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 7, no. 1 (1994): esp. 70ff.

[^9]: For some serious doubts on this see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1983).