El fracaso de Selgin y White para reconocer esto, y su creencia en la inocencia ética de la banca de reserva fraccionaria, se debe a dos confusiones. Por un lado, como ya ha sido indicado, ellos no reconocen que ningún objeto—y ninguna cantidad de dinero (oro) —pueda ser poseído por más de una parte a la vez y que no hay contrato sea capaz de incrementar la cantidad de la propiedad en existencia, y en consecuencia que ninguna pretensión de lo contrario es inherentemente fraudulenta. Por el otro, e íntimamente relacionado, Selgin y White no reconocen la diferencia praxeológica fundamental entre propiedad y títulos de propiedad. Más bien, al subsumir dinero (oro) y sustitutos del dinero (billetes de banco) bajo el mismo título de "dinero" ellos continuamente ofuscan esta distinción misma. Ya que si el dinero (oro) y los títulos de dinero (billetes de banco) están ambos definidos como "dinero", entonces, de hecho, parece ser que no hay ninguna diferencia en si la oferta de dinero o de los billetes aumenta. Ambos son "dinero" y consecuentemente, por definición, en ambos casos el mismo evento—un incremento en la oferta de dinero—ha tenido lugar. Pero si esto no altera los hechos; solo los define fuera de la existencia.

Por supuesto, como Selgin y White correctamente notan, todos el mundo es libres de adoptar cualquier definición y hacer cualquier distinción que desee. Aunque las definiciones no crean distinciones reales; ellas pueden, sin embargo, hacerlas desaparecer. Ellas solo pueden reflejar tales distinciones o sino ignorarlas y confundirlas; y claramente, referirse tanto a dinero y sustitutos de dinero indiscriminadamente como dinero es oscurecer la diferencia entre dos fenómenos y estados de las cuestiones categóricamente—praxeológicamente—distintos. Un título por dinero y un incremento de títulos no son la misma cosa que dinero y un incremento de dinero. Mejor dicho, a diferencia de un incremento en la cantidad de dinero (oro) o de un incremento de títulos respaldados por un correspondiente aumento de dinero, un incremento en la cantidad de títulos por dinero no acompañado por un incremento de dinero necesariamente implica que una y la misma cantidad de dinero está siendo poseída por más de una persona al mismo tiempo; y ya que tal cosa es físicamente imposible—la cantidad de dinero permanece sin ser cambiada y todo el dinero existente debe ser en el presente propiedad de alguno—cada redención de un título fiduciario, entonces, sea en dinero o cualquier otra forma de propiedad real, involucra un acto de apropiación ilícita.

Asuma que existen tanto propiedad en sí misma como títulos de propiedad (notas). Además de la propiedad en bienes de consumo, bienes de producción, y dinero, los títulos para bienes de consumo, los títulos para bienes de producción, y los títulos para dinero están asumidos como existentes. El origen de los títulos de propiedad en adición a la existencia de la propiedad en sí misma promueve la seguridad jurídica y reduce y facilita las disputas legales, y por ende representa, sin lugar a dudas, un desarrollo beneficioso (natural). Es más, permite dos innovaciones. Por un lado, hace posible separar el acto de transferir el ser dueño en propiedad del acto de transferir su posesión. Eso es, se hace posible renunciar o adquirir el carácter de dueño respecto a objetos sin simultáneamente renunciar o adquirir posesión, disposición y control de dichos objetos mismos. Aplicado al dinero se hace posible que, todo el tiempo la propiedad de existentes cantidades de dinero (oro) pudiendo cambiar constantemente de una persona a otra, la cantidad entera de dinero se pueda mantener—sin ningún cambio—en las manos del mismo banco (como el administrador de dinero del que otros son propietarios). Por el otro lado, con el desarrollo de los títulos de propiedad, los canjes intertemporales serán sistemáticamente facilitados. La propiedad existente (presente) o los títulos de ella puede ser transferidos en canje con títulos para propiedades futuras (exposiciones de deuda); y por consiguiente también será asumido que junto a los títulos para propiedad existente (bienes de consumo, bienes de producción, y dinero), los títulos (exposiciones de deuda) para bienes de consumo futuros, para bienes de producción futuros, y para dinero futuro existen y son comerciados de igual forma.

A la luz de estos desarrollos, las siguientes transacciones (contratos) entre dos partes cualesquiera A (cliente bancario) y B (banco) son posibles. A puede transferir su dinero (oro) en la disposición de B y por lo tanto (1) *no* entrega su propiedad sobre él, o (2) entrega su propiedad. No hay tercera *posibilidad*. Si (1), entonces A conserva el título por la suma del dinero transferido a B; B no tiene el título por esta, pero actúa como un almacenista (un depositario) para A (como un fiador). *No hay tercera posibilidad*. Si (2), entonces B adquiere el título por la cantidad de dinero puesto en su disposición por A; A recibe de B en intercambia (a) una cantidad-existente-presente de bienes de consumo y/o de producción previamente poseídos por B y de los que éste era propietario; o (b) un título para una cantidad-existente-presente de bienes de consumo y/o de producción en posesión de B (pero de los que A es ahora propietario) (una exposición de equidad); o (c) un título por una cantidad futura de bienes de consumo y/o de producción y/o dinero (una exposición de deuda). De nuevo, *no hay tercera posibilidad*. Esto es, A no puede retener el carácter de dueño de esta propiedad y transferírselo a B al mismo tiempo.

Entre todas las transacciones posibles, ninguna resultaría en la emisión de una nota fiduciaria. Los medios fiduciarios, de acuerdo con la definición propia de Selgin y White, son "la porción de sustitutos de dinero reembolsable respaldados por activos aparte del dinero base".[^10] Hay dinero (oro) y sustitutos de dinero (títulos por dinero) en existencia, y hay títulos para bienes no-dinero (títulos de equidad), y títulos para aún-no-existentes bienes futuros (exposiciones de deuda). Aparentemente, sin embargo, ninguna cosa tal como "sustitutos de dinero respaldados en activos aparte del dinero base" podría surgir de ninguna de estas transacciones. Selgin y White *asumen* la existencia de medios fiduciarios (y simplemente *asumen* que la ausencia de medios fiduciarios debe ser el resultado de restricciones legales), pero no proporcionan una explicación y reconstrucción praxeológica del origen de una entidad y estado de asuntos tan peculiares. Por el contrario, ellos solo preguntan ¿por qué no? "No vemos por qué banco y cliente no pueden contractualmente acordar convertirlas [esto es, depósitos de demanda y billetes de banco] en deudas y no recibos de depósito." *¿Por qué* es que no puede—y no debe—haber sustitutos de dinero respaldados por activos aparte del dinero? For the same reason that there can and should be no car or house titles backed by assets other than cars or houses, that there can and should be no equity titles backed by assets other than equity, and that there can and should be no assets—money, equity, or debt—owned (backed) by more than one person at a time. Titles to money are—and should be—backed by money in the same way and for the same reason as titles to cars are and should be backed by cars. This is what defines them as property titles. It is in accordance with and a reflection of the nature of property and property titles. In distinct contrast, a title to money backed by assets other than money is a contradiction in terms, and its issue and use involves the same sort of objective misrepresentation as the issue of a title to a car backed by assets other than a car (parts of planes and bikes, for instance).[^11]

The answer to why fractional reserve agreements are ethically impermissible, and why there can be no contracts to make warehouse receipts debt, is that such agreements and contracts contradict (deny) the nature of things. Any such contract is from the outset—a priori—invalid. Selgin and White try to get around this inescapable conclusion by adopting, wittingly or not, an ultra-subjectivist view of contracts and agreements. According to this view, the very fact that a voluntary agreement is reached and/or a contract is concluded demonstrates that it must be a valid—true or permissible—agreement and contract. Yet this view is not only false, it is also incompatible with Rothbard’s title-transfer theory of contract that these authors claim to have accepted. Agreements and contracts per se do not imply anything regarding their validity for the fundamental reason that agreements and contracts do not create reality, but rather presuppose it. More specifically, contracts do not bring property into existence, but rather recognize and transfer existing property. Hence, as in Rothbard’s ethical system, the theory of property must precede the treatment of contracts. Contracts and contract theory presuppose and are constrained by property and property theory. That is, the range of possible (valid) contracts is limited and restricted by the existing quantity (stock) of property and the nature of things, rather than the other way around. Thus, agreements regarding flying elephants, centaurs, squared circles, of *perpetui mobile*, for instance, are invalid contracts. They cannot—by virtue of biological, physical, or mathematical law—be fulfilled, and are from the outset false and fraudulent.

While Selgin and White may acknowledge this, they fail to recognize that a fractional reserve banking agreement implies no lesser an impossibility and fraud than that involved in the trade of flying elephants or squared circles. In fact, the impossibility involved in fractional reserve banking is even greater. For, whereas the impossibility of contracts regarding flying elephants, for instance, is merely a contingent and empirical one (it is not inconceivable that in another possible world, somewhere and sometime, flying elephants may actually exist, thus making such contracts possible), the impossibility of fractional reserve banking contracts is a necessary and categorical one. That is, it is inconceivable—praxeologically impossible—that a bank and a customer can agree to make money substitutes (banknotes, demand deposit accounts) debts instead of warehouse receipts. They may say or certify otherwise, of course, just as one may say that triangles are squares. But what they say would be objectively false. As triangles would remain triangles and be different from squares, so money substitutes would still be money substitutes (titles to present money) and be distinct from debt claims (titles to not yet existing future goods) and equity claims (titles to existing property other than money). To say otherwise does not change reality but objectively misrepresents it.

In doing what Selgin and White believe clients and banks to have done—to agree to make warehouse receipts debt—the money depositor A receives from the bank B a claim to present money, rather than a debtor equity title. That is, A does not in fact give up ownership of the deposited money (as would have been the case if he had received a debtor equity claim from B). While A retains title to the money deposit, however, B does not treat A’s deposit as a bailment, but rather as a loan, and enters it as an asset onto its own (B’s) balance sheet (offset by an equal sum of outstanding demand liabilities). While this may appear initially to be merely a harmless accounting practice, it involves from the outset a misrepresentation of the real state of affairs.[^12] Since both, B as well as A, count the same quantity of money simultaneously among their own assets, they have in effect conspired to represent themselves in their financial accounts as owning a larger quantity of property than they actually own: that is, they have become financial impostors.[^13] Though fraudulent, this would not matter so much if everything were left at this. However, as soon as B acts as if things were the way he represents them on his balance sheet to be—as if the bank owned the deposited money and only had the obligation to redeem outstanding warehouse receipts on demand—mere misrepresentation is turned into misappropriation. If B, in accordance with this misrepresentation, lends out money, or more likely, issues additional warehouse receipts for money and lends these out to some third party C, in the expectation of eventually being repaid principal and interest, the bank becomes engaged in undue appropriation, because what it lends out to C—whether money or titles to money—is in fact not its (B’s) own property but that of someone else (A). It is this fact—that the title transferred from B to C concerns property B does not own—that makes fractional reserve banking from the outset fraudulent.

It is not the case, as is claimed, that fraud (breach of contract) is committed only if B, the fractional reserve bank, is actually unable to fulfill all requests for redemption as they arise. Rather, fraud is also committed each time B does fulfill its redemption obligations. Because whenever B redeems a fractionally covered banknote into money (gold) (whenever a note holder takes possession of his property), it does so with someone else’s money: if B redeems C’s note, it does so with money owned by A, and if A wants his money too, B pays him with money owned by D, and so on. Qua defenders of fiduciary media and fractional reserve banking, Selgin and White would have to maintain that there is no breach of contract as long as B is able to fulfill its contractual obligations with *someone else’s* property (money).

Yet this is patently wrong, and it stands in clear contradiction to Rothbard’s title transfer theory of contract that Selgin and White claim to have accepted. In accordance with Rothbard’s contract theory, individuals are only entitled to make contracts regarding the transfer of *their own property*. In contrast, fractional reserve banking, by its very nature (even if it is practiced successfully), involves contracts concerning the transfer of *other people’s property*. Hence this practice—the issue of fiduciary media—is in principle (inherently) incompatible with the title-transfer theory of contract—and it turns out, not surprisingly, that it is Rothbard, and not his two interpreters, who ultimately demonstrates a better grasp of his own contract theory.

[^10]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 85.

[^11]: Similar logic-semantic confusions are at work when Selgin and White try to reduce the difference between demand and time liabilities to one of degree rather than kind (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 90). Explains Selgin:

> Holders of demand liabilities are granters of credit just as are holders of time liabilities. The only difference is that in the former case the duration of individual loans is unspecified; they are “call loans” that may mature at any time;

and “Mises,” who holds the opposite view, “confuses a difference of degree with one of substance” (Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 62). In fact, it is Selgin who is confused.

To be sure, one might say that it is only a matter of degree whether a loan (of a car or of money) matures in an hour, a day, a week, or a month. Just as surely, however, this does not change the categorical distinction between present—existing—goods and not (yet) existing future goods. At any point in time, a car or a sum of money (gold) either exists or it does not exist. Nor does it alter the praxeological datum that no one, at any time, can act with anything except present goods. Future goods are the goal of actions, but in order to attain them, every actor must first invariably employ present means goods. Nor does Selgin’s observation concerning degrees of time affect in the slightest the fundamental human condition of scarcity. The supply of present goods is at all times limited, and the limited quantity of present goods limits in turn the quantity of possible future goods.

Whereas Mises recognizes the distinction between present goods and future goods as a universal praxeological category, Selgin’s attempt to conflate demand and time deposits (thus distinguish himself fundamentally from Mises) implies a denial that there is no such fundamental difference between present (existing) goods and future (not-existing) goods (or that their existence differs only in degrees). Contrary to Selgin, it is not a matter of degree but rather one of substance whether a car or a sum of money presently exists or not, and whether one person or someone else owns them. Either they exist or they don’t exist, and either A owns them or someone else does. Accordingly if a property title (demand deposit note) then states that one person is the owner of a present car or present money and no car or money exists, or the car or money is presently owned by someone else, this does not represent a degree of truth but a falsehood. Explains Mises:

> A depositor of a sum of money who acquires in exchange for it a claim convertible into money at any time which will perform exactly the same service for him as the sum it refers to has exchanged no present good for a future good. The claim that he has acquired by his deposit is also a present good for him. The depositing of money in no way means that he has renounced immediate disposal over the utility that it commands. (*The Theory of Money and Credit,* p. 268)

See also the two following notes.

[^12]: See on this point Rothbard. “How,” asks Rothbard,

> do these warehouse receipt transactions relate to the T-account balance sheets of the deposit banks? In simple justice, not at all. When I store a piece of furniture worth $5,000 in warehouse, in law and in justice the furniture does *not* show up as an asset of the warehouse during the time that I keep it there. The warehouse does not add $5,000 to both its assets and liabilities because it in no sense *owns* the furniture; neither can we say that I have *loaned* the warehouse the furniture for some indefinite time period. The furniture is mine and remains mine; I am only keeping it there for safekeeping and therefore I am legally and morally entitled to redeem it any time I please. I am not therefore the bank’s “creditor”; it doesn’t *owe* me money which I may some day collect. Hence, there is no debt to show up on the Equity + Liability side of the ledger. Legally, the entire transaction is not a loan but a *bailment*. (*The Mystery of Banking* [New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983], pp. 88–89)

Interestingly, while Selgin and White manifest a strong positivistic tendency (fractional reserve banking is recognized by the courts, so it must be all right; on this tendency see “The Issue of Fraud III” below), they do not come to terms with legal reality. For if money deposits are debt, why, then, don’t the courts apply the same reasoning to all other fungible commodities such as wheat? Why are wheat warehouse receipts not considered a debt but a bailment by the courts? Why is this treatment peculiar to money and the banking business? Moreover, why is it that the courts, even if they falsely consider money deposits as debts, still insist that they are more than an ordinary debt, and the depositor’s relation to the bank is not identical with that of an ordinary creditor? See Rothbard, *Mystery of Banking*, p. 275.

[^13]: See also William Stanley Jevons (*Money and the Mechanism of Exchange* [London: Kegan Paul, 1905], pp. 206–12, 221), who lamented the existence of general deposits since it has “become possible to create a fictitious supply of a commodity, that is, to make people believe that a supply exists which does not exist.” On the other hand, special deposits, such as “bills of lading, pawn-tickets, dock-warrants, or certificates which establish ownership to a definite object,” are superior because “they cannot possibly be issued in excess of the good actually deposited, unless by distinct fraud.” And Jevons concluded that “it used to be held as a general rule of law, that a present grantor assignment of goods not in existence is without operation.”