Terdapat batasan untuk bekalan model ekonomi standard dan permintaan lengkung bersilang untuk mendedahkan harga optimum atau kuantiti yang baik. Keterbatasan itu, sebagaimana yang diketahui oleh Austria, adalah disebabkan oleh andaian yang tidak realistik. Tetapi catatan bahawa andaian dari dunia ini tidak mencukupi, terutamanya jika model yang digunakan untuk menjelaskan dunia yang tidak sepadan dengan andaian. Pemakaian model murah, yang sememangnya mendedahkan fakta-fakta yang penting mengenai bagaimana ekonomi berfungsi, mencedurungkan ramai ahli ekonomi sesat.

# Penaikan kos untuk pengeluar tidak akan menaikan harga 

[episod baru-baru ini](http://www.econtalk.org/archives/2017/02/tom*wainwright.html), di mana tuan rumah iaitu Russ Roberts wawancara wartawan dan pengarang Tom Wainwright *ahli ekonomi* pada buku terbarunya *[Narconomi](https://www.amazon.com/Narconomics-How-Run-Drug-Cartel/dp/1610395832/?tag=misesinsti-20)*, menggambarkan betapa mudahnya logik Econ 101 boleh mengelirukan. Walaupun episod ini layak didengar dan perbincanganya menarik dan bermaklumat, sebahagian besar pada mulanya untuk membincangkan isu harga dadah haram. Memandangkan "paradoks" yang jelas dan hujah "hebat" penulis, Roberts dan Wainwright memulakan dan terjebak dalam perbincangan yang pada asasnya adalah cacat dan oleh itu boleh menipu pendengar.

Dalam hujagnya, Wainwright menyatakan bahawa tumpuan kerajaan terhadap pemotongan bekalan dadah haram tidak menjejaskan harga seperti yang diharapkan. Dia menggunakan contoh seni untuk menggambarkan maksudnya, dan inilah sebenarnya contoh yang lebih baik daripada apa yang dia mungkin sedar. Berikut adalah contohnya: Kalau cat yang digunakan untuk menghasilkan lukisan yang bernilai $50 dan lukisan tertentu ini dijual pada harga $1,000,000, kemudian menaikkan kos kotak cat sebanyak 100 peratus kepada $100 sepatutnya juga menggandakan harga lukisan- seterusnya lukisan itu sepatutnya dijual untuk $2,000,000. Tetapi tidak, harga lukisan seterusnya pelukis ini mungkin masih $1,000,000, atau, untuk mencerminkan peningkatan kos kepada $1,000,050.

Contohnya menggambarkan paradoks dalam apa yang sedang berlaku dalam "perniagaan" dadah haram dan, khususnya, mengapakah percubaan kerajaan mempengaruhi bekalan yang tidak berfungsi. Seperti yang dikatakan oleh Wainwright, walaupun langkah-langkah yang agak berjaya untuk mengurangkan bekalan yang tidak meningkatkan harga akhri bagi pengguna (yang sebahagiannya adalah dinyatakan sebagai rasional). Hasil yang menarik dan juga tidak dijangka ini menunjukkan kerajaan sepatutnya "melabur" dalam mengurangkan permintaan untuk dadah haram.

Masalah dengan hujah adalah bahawa ia bergantung pada analisis keseimbangan sederhana dalam model permintaan dan bekalan yang digunakan dalam kursus Econ 101 untuk mahasiswa baru di universiti. Dan ia sebenarnya tidak terpakai di sini. Had the paintings or illegal drugs markets been in equilibrium, there might indeed be a paradox. But this is hardly the case, *especially* in these markets.

Also, in a state of equilibrium costs perfectly reflect social opportunity costs, and “perfect” competition brings price and cost together so that no one is able to make economic profits. In other words, there is no difference between price and cost. There is, consequently, no reason to in this theory distinguish between them temporally or causally — they appear to be determined instantaneously and accurately. This is also how they are treated in various economics models that students learn to “maximize.”

# Price Drives Cost  — Not the Other Way Around

As we know, however, the real market process is driven by *entrepreneurship* and market actors are not just responsive agents. Entrepreneurs do not live in equilibrium, and they base their business decisions on their own appraisal of the different actions and their imagined outcomes. In this real market, price drives cost  — not the other way around. Indeed, Carl Menger noted that the value of any production good is derived from consumers’ valuation of the consumption goods that it produces, not the other way around. This is also core to for example Mises’s argument about economic calculation.

What this means is that entrepreneurs assume (*choose*, even) costs based on the anticipated revenue of their imagined product. The reason an expensive good is produced at high cost is that those high costs can be covered by the anticipated price that it can be sold for. It doesn’t mean that entrepreneurs choose high costs for the fun of it, but that they motivate a certain level of costs based on the anticipated price — and that price is really dependent only on consumer valuation of the final good.

In imperfect markets, this means there can be high markups that offer entrepreneurs enormous profits. But this is also what lures other entrepreneurs to enter this particular market, so where there are no significant barriers to entry profits will tend to get squeezed until they reach the standard market rate of return. In this process, costs are pushed down but consumer good prices even more so, thereby making consumers the ultimate winners of this process.

So it is not in any sense a paradox that the market price of a box of paint has very little to do with the final price of the painting. The box of paint is traded in the market at a price that partly is derived from the anticipated value of paintings. Similarly, the coca leaves that will eventually end up in a nostril on Wall Street *are valued because the end product is valued.*

If government burns half of those fields, this will not lead to a doubling of the final good’s price. Instead, it will increase the costs that need to be covered by producers to make the final good available in consumer markets. As margins are enormous in illegal drug production and distribution, primarily as a result of government repression, producers don’t think twice to continue just like before without changing prices: it only causes a small dent in their income.

In Wainwright’s example, a kilo of cocaine, with a market value of $100,000 when sold in “tiny portions,” is produced from a ton of fresh coca leaf sold at a price of $500. The refined product sells at $1,000 in Columbia, and to “distributors” in the United states for $15–20,000. In this situation, if the fields of some coca farmers are burned, those farmers lose all their revenue while prices of the remaining product could potentially be bid up (assuming some form of market). How much those prices are bid up depends on the [reservation prices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reservation*price) of existing cocaine producers and the chance of new entrants. It does not cause a proportional ripple effect throughout the supply chain.

This is easy to see if we adopt the Austrian view that pricing of production goods is done “backward” through entrepreneurial bidding aiming for anticipated consumer prices. But using the supply-and-demand schedule for equilibrium prices can produce a fundamentally flawed analysis — even by those who recognize that the assumptions are unrealistic (which Roberts naturally does).

This is not to say that the prices within the cocaine supply chain are not some form of equilibrium prices. The assumption of partial equilibrium is not what makes the analysis flawed. The error lies in failing to recognize that cost (that is, the existence and shape of supply) is a function of the anticipated price (demand) of the final good.

From this follows that changes in factor prices are not necessarily reflected in prices of consumer goods, especially in the short term. Rather, they will be reflected in the profit margins of producers, and can thus cause them to change their behavior.