# Conclusiones

En un periodo relativamente corto de tiempo, hemos cubierto una enorme porción de terreno. El gran reto de la filosofía es la definicion universal, objetiva y absoluta moralmente la cual no se basa ni en Dios ni en el propio estado. En el momento en que nos basamos en Dios o el estado para la definición de moralidad, la moralidad no seguiría siendo universal y absoluta. En otras palabras, no seguiría siendo "moralidad"

La invención de entidades imaginarias como "Dios" y "el estado"no hace *nada* para responder a nuestras preguntas sobre la moralidad.

Entendemos completamente que la invención de Dios no hace nada - y no hace nada - para responder preguntas acerca del origen de la vida, o el universo. Es decir, en respuesta a cualquier pregunta, "algunos seres incomprensibles hicieron cosas inconcebibles de forma irreversible para propósitos desconocidos", no puede ser considerado cualquier tipo de respuesta racional.

El daño más grave en hacer "respuestas" incomprensibles a preguntas racionales y esenciales es que proveen la *ilusión* de una respuesta, los cuales en general niegan la búsqueda de la verdad. Más adelante, un grupo inevitablemente se une para defender y ganar esta respuesta no irracional. En el ámbito de la religión, esto es la casta sacerdotal. En el ámbito del gobierno, esto es la casta política.

Cuando una pregunta real y esencial se encuentra con una mística violenta "respuesta," el progreso humano se convierte en regresión. La ciencia de la meteorología falla en relucir si los sacerdotes dicen que la lluvia cae porque lo quieren los dioses. La ciencia de la medicina no puede desarrollarse si una enfermedad es considerada como un castigo de los dioses. La ciencia de la física se paraliza y retrocede si el movimiento de las estrellas es considerado un trabajo de las deidades.

Cuando respuestas incorrectas son presentadas a preguntas morales, poner en prueba a esas preguntas inevitablemente se vuelve un crimen moral. Cuando las ilusiones son sustituidas por curiosidad, aquellos que tienen ganancias de esas ilusiones inevitablemente terminan usando la violencia para defender sus mentiras.

And for evermore, *children* are the first victims of these exploitive falsehoods.

Children do not have to be bullied into eating candy, playing tag, or understanding that two plus two is four. The human mind does not require that the truth be inflicted through terror, boredom, insults and repetition. A child does not have to be “taught” that a toy is real by telling him that he is damned to hell for eternity if he does not *believe* that the toy is real. A child does not have to be bullied into believing that chocolate tastes good by being told that his taste buds are damned by original sin.

Saying that morality exists because God tells us that it exists is exactly the same as saying that morality does not exist. If you buy an iPod from me on eBay, and I send you an empty box, you will write to me in outrage. If I tell you not to worry, that my invisible friend assures me that there is in fact an iPod in the box, would you be satisfied? Would not my claim that my invisible friend tells me of the iPod’s existence be a certain proof that the iPod did not in fact exist?

If morality is justified according to the authority of a being that does not exist, then morality by definition is not justified. If I write a check that is “certified” by a bank that does not exist, then clearly my check is by definition *invalid*.

The same is true for enforcing morality through the irrational monopoly of “the state.” If we allow the existence of a government – a minority of people who claim the right to initiate the use of force, a right which is specifically denied to everyone else – then any and all moral “rules” enforced by the government are purely subjective, since the government is *by definition* based on a violation of moral rules.

If I say that I need the government to protect my property, but that the government is by definition a group of people who can violate my property rights at will, then I am caught in an insurmountable contradiction. I am saying that my property rights must be defended – and then I create an agency to defend them that can violate them at any time. This is like being so afraid of rape that I hire a bodyguard to protect me from being raped – but in the contract, I allow my bodyguard – and anyone he chooses – to rape me at will.

Because “morality” based on the state and on religion is so irrational and self-contradictory, it *requires* a social agency with a monopoly on the initiation of force to function. Since everyone is just making up “morals” and claiming absolute justification based on imaginary entities, rational negotiation and understanding remain impossible. We do not need a government because people are bad, but rather, because people are irrational, we end up with a government. False moral theories always end up requiring violence to enforce them. Moral theories are not developed in *response* to violence – false moral theories *cause* violence – in fact, *demand* violence.

The moral subjectivism and irrationality involved in answering “What is truth?” with “God,” and “What is morality?” with “government,” is so openly revealed by the framework of UPB that it is hard to imagine that this concept is not more widespread.

One central reason for this is that truly understanding UPB requires the very highest possible mental functioning. It is relatively easy to be rational; it is very difficult to think about the implicit premises of rationality, and all that they entail. It is relatively easy to debate; it is very difficult to tease out all of the implicit assumptions involved in the very act of debating.

It is easy to catch a ball – it is hard to invent the physics that explain motion *universally*.

Thinking *about* thinking is the hardest mental discipline of all.

At the beginning of this book, I talked about a “beast” that terrified and enslaved mankind. This beast is always located on a mountaintop, or in a deep cave. People are afraid of the beast in the world, which is why the beast has never been defeated.

The beast has never been defeated because the beast is an illusion.

The beast cannot be defeated in the world, because the beast is within ourselves.

The collective fantasy that there exists a “null zone,” where morality magically reverses itself, called “the government” is exactly the same as the collective fantasy that there exists a “null zone” called “God” where *reality* reverses itself.

If we define “morality” according to the subjective fantasies of mere mortals, then it will forever remain under the manipulative control of power-hungry tyrants. Since God does not exist, anyone who speaks about morality in relation to God is just making up definitions to serve his own purposes.

Since “the state” does not exist, anyone who speaks about morality in relation to government is just making up definitions to serve his own purposes.

Until we can define an objective and rational morality that is free from the subjective whims of each individual, we will never make the kind of progress that we need to as a species.

Morality, like physics, biology, geology and chemistry, must join the realm of the sciences if we are to flourish – and indeed, perhaps, to survive at all.

However, if we can sustain our courage, it is this discipline alone that can set us, and our children – and all humanity in the future – free from the tyranny of the greatest beast: our own moral illusions.