# Gabartawa

A cikin jawabin 'yancin kai na Amirka, shi Thomas Jefferson ya shaida cewa:

>waɗannan gaskiya su hakikanta, wato: an halicci dukkan mutane daidai; kuma an ba da ɗan adam cikakkan hakkidaga Allah; kuma su waɗannan hakkoki sun ƙunsa rai, 'yancin kai da kuma dama da bin sha’awar rayuwarsa; da kuma amma, domin a amintacce waɗannan hakkoki aka kafa shugabannin al’ummai, waɗanda su na karɓar mulkin su tare da izinin al’ummar; wato a duk lokacin da kowane nau'i na gwamnati ta rushe waɗannan manyan al’amura, ya danganadahakkin mutane su canza ko su soke shi, da kuma kafa sabuwar mulki, wanda tushensa ya tsaya a kan waɗannan ka'idoji, da kuma shiryawada ikon sabon gwamnatinga a cikin irin tsarin wanda game da su zai zama mafi kyau na tabbatarwa da zaman lafiya da farin cikinsu. Duk da haka, hankali ya nuna cewa bai kamata ana canza gwamnatoci masu tsawon zama ba a kan dalillai marasa muhimmanci; kuma daidai da haka, rayuwa da zaman duniya ya nuna cewa ɗan adam ya fi so ya sha wuya idan zai iya jurewa matsalar ko halin da yake a ciki, fiye da sa kansa hanyardaidai ta hanyar kawar da siffofin marasadaidai wanda ya saba da su. Amma idan ba sau ɗaya ko sau biyu ba irin gwamnatin wanna ya yi ta zaluncin su da cin zarafin su, tare da sa su karkashin mulkin kama-karya, kenan, ya kasance a gare su su ɗauki nauyi da mataki na hambarar da gwamnatin nan, da kuma su gudanar da sabonfasali don tsaron rayukansu nan gaba.

A yanzu, bayan kusan shakaru 200 daga lokacin jawabin ‘yancin kai, ya dace mu yi wa kanmu tambayoyihaka: shin kuwa gwamnati ta yi aikinsa a gaske, ko kuma shin sanin duniya da ilimin nazariyyar ya ko ba mu dama wanda zai sa mu bincike wasu hanyoyi da dama wadanda zasu tsaron rayukanmu duka nan gaba. Wato, jigon takaddar ga shi ne mu bincike ishashen amsar ga wadannan tambayoyi ma su muhimmi. Hakikanin Magana shi ne, kwanan nan tambayoyinga wato sun zama da gaggawa tun daga faruwan Satumba 11, 2001. Guda daga cikin hidimomin gwamnati shi ne su tsare mu daga ta’addanci. Duk da haka amma, minene ainihin kokarin gwamnatin na Amirka wanda sunka yi domin su kauda ayyukan ta’adanci da su ka faruwa a World Trade Centre da kuma Pentagon? Daga skekara zuwa shekara gwamnatin Amirka na aiki da kasafin kudi na soja biliyan $1 ta wajen garkuwan kasar kawai. Kuma wanan kimanin kudi ya fi jimlar kasafin kudi ta sauran babban kasashen 24 wanda sun zo bayan Amirka a bangaren manyar kasafin kudi.Wato, kasar Amirka na da babban sadarwa ta masu aike da masu rehoton wadanda su na aiki a asirce. Amma duk da haka, ba su yi wa mutanensu cikakkan garkuwa da tsaro daga masu ta’adanci da su ka so su halakama rayuwar mutanen kasar da kuma sojojin su. Fiye da haka kuma, gwamnatin Amirka ba ta dai gazawa ba ta wajen kauda bala’in na ranar Satumba 11, ta kuma kara ta wajen jawowar masalar. Yayin da ake bin tsarin siyasar kasashen waje (daukar nauyin takunkumi na tattalin arziki, dakarun sojan sun shiga kasashe fiye da 100, da boma-bamai, ba tare da bama-bamai ba, da rikice-rikicen kabilanci, da shiga bangarori daban-daban a cikin ƙasa da bala'i da kuma rikice-rikice na kabilanci, da kuma ƙoƙarin kokarin gudanar da harkokin siyasa da soja a dukkanin bangarorin duniya), gwamnati ta ba da dalili sosai ga 'yan ta'adda na kasashen waje kuma ta sanya wa Amurka matsayi na farko.Dadin dadawa, yaya zai yiwuwa a ce mutanen da ba su isa kome ba za su iya su barnatar kamar haka. Tabbas, irin haka kan yiwuwa domin gwamnati ta gazawa da basuwa garkuwar mutanensa. Amma kuma duba, bayan duk haka, gwamnatin Amirka ta cigaba da zaman mai sa baki, da kuma mai barazana a kasashen waje. Sojojin USA sun hambarar da gwamnatin Afganista, saboda sun ji kamar su ne ka boyewa Usama Bin Laden. A cikin jidalin ga, an halakar da mutani dubu-dubu ga banza. Amma duk da haka, duba bayan shekara biyu daga 9/11 da an ka kai wa farmaki ga US, shi Usama ba’a ko kama shi ba. Kuma, dan an ka sami sabbin gwamnatin Afganista wanda su Amirka na goyon baya nai, wato Amirka ta hita batun kamawa Usama. Sun je cigabawa da fada da wasu makiyin kasa, kamar kasar Iraqi, masu dukiyan man fetur da yawa. Lallai, irin wanan manufa ta cigaba da sawa wasu kasashe su tsanen USA. Ba shaka, ta haka ne kasashen waje ke zama makiyin Amirka, domin su samun daman ramawa ne. Amma duk da samun haka, kasar US ta cigaba da zaluncinta da kuma rashin gaskiyanta zuwa ga mutanensu. A misali, kudi da aka zubawa cikin yaki sun daga. Lallai a gaske, faruwan zamanin ga ya kamata a ce an zauna a kirkiro da hanyoyin samun kwaancin hankali, da cewa an yi lisafin kudaden ga, da kuma ta wani hanyar ne za’a tsaron rayuwar mutanen kasar. Da kuma minene nauyin gwamnati, da na al’umma game ga sa wa zaman lafiya.

* * *

Biyu daga cikin nazari na tattalin arzikin kasa da kuma na ilimin falsafa ta gehen ilimin siyasar wanda an fi yarda da su su ne : na daya ; a ra’ayin customa, kowne irin babakere babu kyau. A nazarce, kalmar babakere yana nufi ikon da masana’a guda zai samu a cikin wani bangaren kasuwanci, wanda shi kadai ne mai daman yin wani sana’a. Kamar a ce, shi wane ya na da babakeren kasuwar goro. A takaice, shi mai babakeren zai riki da iyakar dama na wannan sana’a. Wato, dauk mai sayaya, dole su zo a gare shi su karbi abun kenan duk kudi da ya sa dole su saya haka nan. Na biyu, tanadin tsaro shi ne manufan aikin gwamnati da kuma hakikanin wajibin gwamnati. A nan, Kalmar tsaro ta kan nufin ya’inda aka fada a cikin jawabin ‘yancin kai; wato, tsaron rai, 'yancin kai, dukiya da kuma dama da bin sha’awar rayuwarsadaga tashin hankalin gida (aikata laifuka) da tashin hankali na waje (yaki). Dangane da cikakkiyar sanannun kalmomi da aka yarda da ita, an bayyana gwamnati a matsayin hidima mai ‘yanciwanda ta tsayi bisa ga doka da kuma tsari (mai yanke hukunci da kuma mai karfi). Wadannan shawarwari sun nuna rashin daidaito sun jawo damuwa tsakanin masana harkokin tattalin arziki da falsafa, kuma kamar yadda ya kasance, irin wannan hali ya kasance daya daga jingin ra'ayin farko, wato sun riki na farko maimakon na biyu. Masu bi da wannan nazari da ra’ayin na gargajiya. kuma suna bayar da goyon baya ga mahimmanci da kimayan wannan nazari na biyu. Yayinda aka tabbatar da hujjoji kimaya-da na tarihi-, masu gabatar da ra'ayoyin ra'ayi na gargajiya suna fuskantar kunya a wajen nazarinsu.A wannan karni na ashirin wanda aka ƙarene aka nuna wani aikatan cin zarafin mutane kamar ya’inda bait aba faruwa ba a tarihin ɗan adam.A cikin littafinsa Death by Government, Rudolph Rummel ya kiyasta kimanin mutane miliyan 170 da suka rasa rayuka ta hanun gwamnati a karni na ashirin.Shaidu sun nuna daga tarihi cewa, maimakon tsaron rayuka, 'yanci, da kuma neman farin ciki na' yan 'yan ƙasa, dole ne a dauki gwamnatoci mafi girma barazanar tsaro ta mutum. Masu goyon bayar ra’ayi na gargajiya (Kenan sun barin nazari ta dayan batun muguntar ‘yancin kai na gwamnati domin su riki da nazari biyun batun muhimmancin gwamnati) in kuwa za su ceci ra’ayi na biyu, wato gwamnatin tana da alhakin samar da dokoki da tsari, dole su sake duba ra'ayi na biyu. Sanin dabarun zaman duniya ta nuna cewa wasu jihohi suna da zalunci, ba masu tsaro ba. Saboda haka, idan ba za’a yi jifakome game ga ra’ayi na biyu ba, ana buƙatar ƙarin bayani game da shi: yana yiwuwa ne cewa wasu jihohin su na tsaro.Saboda haka, maimakon a sa gwamnati a laifi ta gurgunta irin wannan gagarumar rikici ta musamman a cikin karni na baya, an yi ƙoƙari da yawa don bayyana wannan rikodin sakamakon takaddama na gwamnati. Yawancin masana kimiyyar siyasar, har da Rummel da aka ambata, sun yi ƙoƙarin nunawa ta hanyar bayanai kididdigarda dama cewa rashin mulkin dimokuradiyya shi ne dalilin da ya bayyana "rashin tausayi" na karni na ashirin.Gaskiya ne, masu mulkin dimokuradiyya na yaki da tsarin mulkin wand aba su demokuradiyya ba, amma da zato ba su yaki da sauran dimokuradiyya. Saboda haka, zai zama kamar hakacewa idan an sami mafarkin Wilson na “making the world safe for democracy”, za a cika zaman lafiya da kwanciyar hankali na har abada.A irin wannan yanayi, masana tattalin arziki kamar James Buchanan da kuma makarantar "tattalin arziki na tsarin mulki" sun nuna cewa za a iya inganta ingantacciyar rikici na gwamnatoci game da samar da tsaro na ciki da na waje ta hanyar tsarin fasalin tsarin mulki wanda ya dace da ƙuntatawa na ikon mulki.Duk waɗannan bayani an bincikar su kuma sun ƙi a cikin wannan rubutun. Amma game da batun zaman lafiya na dimokuradiyya, yawancin masu tallafawa suna lura da cewa, daidai da masana tarihi na soja kamar J.F.C. Fuller da M. Howard, yana dogara ne akan wani zaɓi na musamman ko ma a cikin rikodin tarihi.Bari in ambaci kawai misalai guda biyu.Na farko, ta yaya wannan bayanan litattafan zai iya nuna rashin tabbas irin su yaki na Yammacin Amurka (Independence (War Between States) tare da ita har zuwa lokacin da ba'a zalunta ba?Amsa: ta hanyar cirewa da kuma watsi da shi ko kuma ya rage muhimmancinta. Na biyu, masu tallafawa da litattafan demokradiya na zaman lafiya suna goyon bayan abin da suke da shi ta hanyar rarraba mulkoki na gargajiya da kuma mulkin mallaka na yau da kullum kamar yadda ya dace da tsarin mulkin demokuradiyya da kuma rashin bin ka'idoji da kuma bambanta da abin da suke rarraba a matsayin "dimokuradiyya."Duk da haka, bisa ga tarihi (kuma idan za’a wani rukunin mulkoki da dole), wato dimokuradiyya da mulkin kama karya wanda ya kamata a hade tare. Sarakuna na gargajiya sunyi kama da mulkin kama-karya a fuskance.Maimakon haka, 'yan mulkin mallaka sune tsarin mulkin demokradiyya na yau da kullum. Lenin, Stalin, Hitler, da kuma Mao sun kasance masu mulkin demokra] iyya ne, idan aka kwatanta da tsohon sarakuna na Rasha, Jamus, Austria, da Sinanci. Hakika, Lenin, Stalin, Hitler, da kuma Mao (kuma kusan dukkanin magoya bayansu) sun kasance masu girman kai ga ƙiyayya da duk abin da suka shafi mulkin mallaka.Sun san cewa suna da alhakin tsayayyar siyasar demokradiyya, kuma suna aiki da siyasar dimokiradiyya (zabuka, raba gardama, tarzoma masu yawa, farfagandar watsa labaran watsa labaru, da dai sauransu) a duk fadin mulkin su.A wani bangare kuma, game da tsari na sake fasalin tsarin mulkin da aka tsara domin rage ikon mulkin jihar, da dama masu bayar da gudummawa ga wannan rukunin ya bayyana cewa dole ne a yi la'akari da irin waɗannan ƙoƙarin da ba za a iya amfani da su ba kuma in ba su da ma'ana idan an fassara fassarar da kuma aiwatar da wannan gazawar ga gwamnati da kansa ko kuma daya daga cikin gabobinsa, kamar babban kotun gwamnati. (Dubi ƙarin akan wannan a kasa.)Ƙarin tabbatacce ga masu bayar da gudummawa na wannan rukuni ya bayyana na uku, littafi mai lakabi Ludwig von Mises, wanda za'a iya la'akari da haɗuwa da sama. Mises ya tabbatar da cewa domin ya cika aikinsa na farko kamar mai bada tsaro, dole ne gwamnati ta biya hakikanin yanayi guda biyu: dole ne a shirya shi ta demokradiya, kuma dole ne a ba da izini ga rashin daidaituwa.

> Whenever the inhabitants of a particular territory, whether it be a single village, a whole district, or a series of adjacent districts, make it known, by a freely conducted plebiscite, that they no longer wish to remain united to the state to which they belong at the time, their wishes are to be respected and complied with. This is the only feasible and effective way of preventing revolutions and international wars. (Ludwig von Mises, *Liberalism* [Irvington-on-Hudson, New York: Foundation for Economic Education, and San Francisco, Calif.: Cobden Press, 1985], p. 109)

One obvious attraction of this thesis is that it can account for the events of the American War of Southern Independence. Thus, until 1861, it was generally taken for granted in the U.S. that a right to secession existed, and that the Union was nothing but a voluntary association of independent states; but when the desire for the unrestricted right to secede was no longer respected, the state turned from protector to aggressor. Mises’s thesis is accorded considerable attention in this volume, and the role of secession as a means for limiting or escaping government depredation is emphasized repeatedly. However, in requiring a protective state to allow unlimited secession from its jurisdiction, Mises’s explanation essentially renders the State a voluntary membership organization with taxes amounting to voluntarily paid (or withheld) membership dues. With an unlimited right to secession even at the level of individual households, the government is no longer a “State,” but a club. Hence, strictly speaking, Mises’s thesis must be considered a rejection of proposition two rather than merely its revision. The contributors to this volume concur with this judgment, not only for empirical reasons but even more so for theoretical ones. Every attempt to explain the dismal performance of governments (States) qua providers of security as inherent in the nature of state-government must begin with a precise definition of state-government (the State). The definition of the State adopted throughout this volume is uncontroversial. It corresponds closely to that proposed by Thomas Hobbes and adopted to this day by countless political philosophers and economists. Briefly, Hobbes argued that in the state of nature, men would constantly be at each others’ throats. *Homo homini lupus est*. Each individual, left to his own devices and provisions, would spend too little on his own defense. Hence, permanent interpersonal warfare would result. The solution to this presumably intolerable situation, according to Hobbes and his followers, is the institution of a State (government). In order to institute peaceful cooperation—security—among themselves, two individuals, A and B, require a third independent party, S, as ultimate judge and peacemaker. However, this third party, S, is not just another individual, and the good provided by S, that of security, is not just another “private” good. Rather, S is a sovereign and has as such two unique powers. On the one hand, S can insist that his subjects, A and B, not seek protection from anyone but him; that is, S is a compulsory territorial monopolist of protection and ultimate decision making (jurisdiction). On the other hand, S can determine unilaterally (without unanimous consent) how much A and B must spend on their own security; that is, S has the power to impose taxes in order to provide security “collectively.” Based on this definition of government as a compulsory territorial monopolist of protection and jurisdiction equipped with the power to tax without unanimous consent, the contributors to this volume argue that, regardless of whether such a government is a monarchy, a democracy, or a dictatorship, any notion of limiting its power and safeguarding individual life, liberty, and property must be deemed illusory. Under monopolistic auspices the price of justice and protection must rise and its quality must fall. A tax-funded protection agency, it is pointed out, is a contradiction in terms: it is an expropriating property protector and can only lead to ever more taxes and less protection. In fact, even if a state limited its activities exclusively to the protection of life, liberty, and property (as a protective state à la Jefferson would do), the further question of how much security to provide would arise. Motivated like everyone else by selfinterest and the disutility of labor, but with the unique power to tax without consent, a government’s answer will always be the same: to maximize expenditures on protection—and almost all of a nation’s wealth can be consumed by the cost of protection—and at the same time to minimize the production of protection. Furthermore, a monopoly of jurisdiction must lead to a deterioration in the quality of justice and protection. If one can appeal only to the State for justice and protection, justice and protection will be distorted in favor of government—constitutions and supreme courts notwithstanding. After all, constitutions and supreme courts are state constitutions and courts, and whatever limitations to government action they might contain is determined by agents of the very same institution. Accordingly, the definitions of life, liberty, and property and their protection will continually be altered and the range of jurisdiction expanded to the state’s advantage. The first person to provide a systematic explanation for the apparent failure of governments as security producers along the above sketched lines was Gustave de Molinari (1818–1912), a prominent Belgian-born French economist, student of JeanBaptiste Say, and teacher of Vilfredo Pareto, and for several decades the editor of the *Journal des Économistes*, the professional journal of the French Economic Association, *the Societé d’Économie Politique*. De Molinari’s central argument was laid out in his article “De la Production de la Securité” of February 1849. The argument is worth quoting because of its theoretical rigor and its seemingly visionary foresight:

> If there is one well-established truth in political economy, it is this: That in all cases, for all commodities that serve to provide for the tangible or intangible needs of consumers, it is in the consumer’s best interest that labor and trade remain free, because the freedom of labor and trade have as their necessary and permanent result the maximum reduction of price. And this: That the interests of the consumer of any commodity whatsoever should always prevail over the interests of the producer. Now in pursuing these principles, one arrives at this rigorous conclusion: That the production of security should, in the interests of the consumers of this intangible commodity, remain subject to the law of free competition. Whence it follows: That no government should have the right to prevent another government from going into competition with it, or require consumers of security to come exclusively to it for this commodity... Either this is logically true, or else the principles on which economic science is based are invalid. (Gustave de Molinari, *Production of Security*, J.H. McCulloch, trans. [New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, 1977], pp. 3–4)

De Molinari then predicted what would happen if the production of security is monopolized:

> If, on the contrary, the consumer is not free to buy security wherever he pleases, you forthwith see open up a large profession dedicated to arbitrariness and bad management. Justice becomes slow and costly, the police vexatious, individual liberty is no longer respected, the price of security is abusively inflated and inequitably apportioned, according to the power and influence of this or that class of consumers. (Molinari, *Production of Security*, pp. 13–14)

Nearly all contributors to this volume pay explicit tribute to Molinari’s pathbreaking theoretical insight. Hence, the present volume is dedicated to the memory of Gustave de Molinari. If Molinari’s explanation of the dismal performance of government as security provider by the nature of government qua compulsory territorial monopolist of law and order is accepted, however, then the question of alternatives arises. Accordingly, the bulk of this volume consists of contributions to this quest for private and voluntary (market-produced) alternatives to the failed and fundamentally flawed system of state-protection. How could and would an alternative system of freely competing security producers work? Based on historical experience and economic logic, how effective are private alternatives such as mercenaries, guerrillas, militias, partisans, and privateers? What are the consequences of the free proliferation of weapons, in particular of nuclear arms? What is the role of ideology and public opinion in defense and war? What type of good is defense, a “private” or a “public” good? Can protective defense be provided by freely competing and financed insurance agencies? How would the “logic” of competitive insurance-protection differ from that of monopolistic state-protection? How can the transition from a system of monopolistic to competitive security production be achieved? What is the role of secession in this process? How can state-free societies—natural orders—possibly defend themselves against state attacks and invasions? These are the central questions addressed and answered in the present volume by an international assembly of contributors from philosophy, economics, history, sociology, and political science.

* * *

The contributions to Section One on state-making and warmaking set the stage historically and conceptually. Marco Bassani and Carlo Lottieri locate the topic and theme of the volume in history and the history of political thought. They emphasize the historical modernity of the institution of a State—States have not always existed—and direct particular attention to medieval (feudal) Europe as an example of a “Society without State,” from which valuable insights regarding the present and its possible paths of transformation can be gained. They explain the ideological revolution, associated with such names as Machiavelli, Bodin, Hobbes, and Rousseau, that supported and led up to the rise of the State. They review the rise of a liberal-libertarian ideological opposition to Statism, associated in particular with the names of Molinari (in the nineteenth century) and Rothbard (in the twentieth). They note the importance of European “realism,” i.e., the “elitist” social theorists such as G. Mosca, V. Pareto, and R. Michels in Italy and Carl Schmitt in Germany, for a correct understanding of the “non-neutral” nature of the State and sovereignty. And they explore the prospects for liberty and protection in the current world torn between a tendency toward political centralization (a One World Order) and an opposite tendency toward decentralization and secession. Murray N. Rothbard (1926–1995), the author of the second contribution to Section One, is the most important twentiethcentury disciple of Molinari. In synthesizing Molinari’s monopoly (or rather antimonopoly) theory with Ludwig von Mises’s neo-Austrian system of free-market economics (praxeology) and natural-law ethics, Rothbard created a grand new anti-Statist theoretical system, of Austro-Libertarianism. As they were by Molinari, most contributors to this volume have been profoundly influenced by Rothbard and his system. In his contribution to this volume, published originally in 1963 and reprinted here with the permission of the Ludwig von Mises Institute, Rothbard introduces the conceptual and terminological distinctions fundamental to all of the following. He clarifies the meaning of property, aggression, crime, selfdefense, punishment, State, peace, war (“just” and “unjust”), revolution, imperialism, neutrality, and isolationism, and he explains the inherently aggressive nature of the State, i.e., the indissoluble link between War-Making and State-Making. The contributions to Section Two focus on the subject of government forms, war, and strategy. Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn (1909–1999), in the last article completed before his death, presents a sweeping portrait of European history and the role of monarchy and Christian kings. In the European-Christian worldview, the king was seen as part of a natural, quasi-familial hierarchical or “vertical” social order: of “God the Father in Heaven, the Holy Father in Rome, the King as the Father of the Fatherland, and the Father as the King in the Family.” He describes the gradual deconstruction of this vertical worldview and its displacement, beginning with the French Revolution and completed with World War I and II, by a “new” egalitarian or “horizontal” outlook incompatible with monarchy and kings. He identifies democracy (majority rule), socialism (international and national), and popular dictatorship as expressions of this new horizontal worldview. Furthermore, he provides ample historical illustration of how the transformation from monarchy to democracy changed the conduct of war from limited warfare to total war. Gerard Radnitzky, in his wide-ranging essay, bolsters Kuehnelt-Leddihn’s case against democracy. Following Anthony de Jasay, Radnitzky begins with a detailed analysis of the economics and politics of majoritarian democracy and refutes as illusory and impossible the claims of constitutional economists such as James Buchanan. A discussion of the thesis “democracies are more peaceful” occupies the center of his chapter. Based on analytical considerations and detailed historical evidence, Radnitzky rejects the thesis.Further, he identifies the thesis “that democracies do not make war with each other” as “a cornerstone of the New World Order crowd” and U.S. imperialism and hegemony. He concludes with a few game-theoretical considerations regarding the possibility of private defense coalitions and some remarks on the likelihood of the decline and demise of the State. Bertrand Lemennicier provides an economic-conceptual and formalistic, game-theoretical explanation of the effects and prospects of government policies and treaties concerning the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. In accordance with standard economic cartel theory, Lemennicier argues that any such agreements are bound to fail due to external and internal pressure. The cartel members cannot lastingly prevent nonmember countries from developing nuclear weapons independently. And within the cartel, each member has a constant incentive to cheat (and sell). Moreover, Lemennicier argues that even if a cartel agreement could be maintained and enforced, this would still be a “bad” idea. The world is made less safe rather than more so when a single country dominates in nuclear possession and enforcement. “The U.S. retains a monopoly on nuclear dissuasion and plays the part of world enforcer, excluding international exchanges for countries seeking nuclear weapons,” writes Lemennicier. “Such a position is costly, and the U.S. has no legitimate claim to such a role.” The contributions to Section Three review the historical record of private alternatives to State defense and warfare. Joseph Stromberg considers the example of professional “standing armies” commanded by aristocratic officers. He looks at the experience with mercenary armies in Renaissance Italy. He discusses the role of a militia in republican theory and practice from ancient Greece and Rome to the United States and Switzerland. Special attention is given to guerrilla warfare. Its essentially defensive nature is explained, and its role in the American Revolution, in the War for Southern Independence, and in the Second Anglo-Boer War is discussed. Based on this evidence, Stromberg suggests as a solution to the problem of defensive protection some combination of voluntary militias (inspired if possible by a unifying ideology or faith) and modern mercenaries (in the form of professional insurance-protection companies), both steeped in the theory and practice of guerrilla warfare. Larry Sechrest opens his contribution with a brief discussion of the nature of the “good” of defense and argues that defense is a distinctly “private” good (while “national defense” is an “imaginary” good). He then applies these theoretical considerations to the subject of naval warfare. In particular, he provides a detailed survey of “privateering” as a form of naval warfare conducted by privately owned ships from the twelfth to the nineteenth centuries. Sechrest explains how privateers operated, the legal customs that grew up around them, and how remarkably effective and profitable they were. Finally, as to why the practice of privateering declined after the nineteenth century, Sechrest argues that this has no technological reasons. To the contrary, privateering died out because it was “too” effective and threatened the jobs of the regular State-navies. Jeffrey Rogers Hummel begins with a discussion of the anthropological preconditions of State formation and the reasons for the historical triumph of States over Stateless societies. He explores the reasons—population size, geography, political decentralization, wealth and technology—for the success of some States and world regions and the failure of others. In particular, Hummel investigates and emphasizes the importance of ideas and ideological convictions, of motivation and morale, in war and defense. Finally, he ponders the ideological requirements of liberating oneself of the “macroparasitism” of one’s own State and the prospects of defending a free territory against the potential aggression of another, foreign State. Hummel expresses considerable optimism regarding the effectiveness of such a defense—because free societies will be wealthier and technologically more advanced than statist societies—but cautions that the maintenance of a free society (rather than a regression to Statism) requires eternal ideological vigilance on the part of the public. The final section, Section Four, is dedicated to the theory of private security production and its various practical applications. In his contribution, Walter Block argues that to claim “that a tax collecting government can legitimately protect its citizens against aggression is to contradict oneself, since such an entity starts off the entire process by doing the very opposite of protecting those under its control.” In support of this claim, Block reviews, analyzes, and refutes the entire panoply of statist arguments: the “prisoner’s dilemma,” the “free rider,” the “externality,” and the “public goods” thesis in favor of “national defense.” Defense, Block explains, is defense of private property and as “private” as private property. Last, he discusses the thesis, popular especially in “public choice” and “constitutional economics” circles, that States are forms of clubs (and clubs forms of States), and he concurs with Joseph Schumpeter’s verdict that this thesis “only proves how far removed this part of the social sciences is from scientific habits of mind.” In my own contribution to this volume, I open with a reconstruction the Hobbesian myth of “collective security” and its empirical and logical refutation. He then proceeds to a detailed analysis of risk, property, and insurance. He comments on the “arbitrariness” of “national” borders, and hence of “national” defense (in contrast to the “natural” borders of private property and the defense of such borders). He provides a comparative analysis of insurance-protection versus State-protection and contrasts the logic of State-warfare to that of freely financed protection agencies. Finally, Hoppe points out that insurance agencies, in contrast to States, will not disarm those they protect, and he addresses the question of how a free and armed society in conjunction with professional protection-insurance agencies would likely go about defending itself against State aggression. Guido Hülsmann, in the final contribution to this volume, deals with secession as a means of establishing a private-property order and assuring effective protection. He discusses the nature of secession and its comparative advantages as compared to other forms of political reform. After examining the conditions that must be met for secession to be successful, Hülsmann turns to a key problem of secessionist movements: defense against the government from which they are seceding. He argues that secessionist defense organizations must themselves be run on the basis of private-property principles to ensure that the political goal of libertarian secession be reached and that its military effectiveness be as high as possible. Though the implications of the arguments made in this volume are radical and sweeping, the principles are quite simple at root. In economics, the contributors seek the consistent application of market theory, not its arbitrary exclusion from whole areas of life, such that it applies also to the delivery of goods and services associated with security and defense. In politics, the contributors seek only the application of the principle Jefferson presented in his Declaration of Independence, that people have the right and duty to throw off governments that are not effecting their safety and find alternatives that provide guards for future security. In both respects, these ideas represent a relatively unexplored application of traditional liberal theory. And yet, given the continued rise of the national-security state in our own time, the future of liberty itself may hinge on our willingness to push these principles to their fullest extent.

Hans-Hermann Hoppe
