## Editor's Note

This edition of Mises’s Human Action is reproduced from the Foundation for Economic Education’s 4th edition which was a reprint of the 3rd 1966 Henry Regnery edition. In this book Mises cited many foreign language works in footnotes. Whenever feasible, if English-language translations are available, the editor has referenced the pertinent pages in those English translations. Also when the meaning of foreign words and phrases are not readily apparent from the context, English translations of those foreign terms have been inserted, in brackets, immediately following.

For the benefit of scholars who have read, studied, and cited Mises’s Human Action over many years, this Liberty Fund edition has been typeset, insofar as possible, to preserve the pagination of the 3rd (1966) and 4th (1996) editions, which were identical. As it was not always possible to keep the page divisions exactly the same, a careful scrutiny will detect minor discrepancies on [some] pages.

Because the vocabulary Mises used in Human Action included many words and phrases which will be unfamiliar to modern readers, this Liberty Fund Edition reproduces Percy L. Greaves, Jr.’s Mises Made Easier: A Glossary to Ludwig von Mises’ HUMAN ACTION, first published in 1974. This glossary defines and explains technical terms and historical references and includes translations of all foreign-language words and phrases in Human Action.

### Ancap Channel's Note

This edition doesn't preserves the same page numbering. For simplicity, page references were be removed.
