Aber die Theorie der Kollektivgüter bricht nicht nur wegen der fehlerhaften moralischen Argumentation zusammen. Selbst das utilitaristische, ökonomische Denken, das in dem obigen Argument enthalten ist, ist offensichtlich falsch. Wie die Theorie der Kollektivgüter besagt, könnte es gut sein, dass es besser ist solche öffentlichen Güter zu haben, als sie nicht zu haben, obwohl nicht vergessen werden sollte, dass es keinen a priori Grund gibt, dass dies zwingend notwendig sein muss (was dann das Ende des Argumentieren der Kollektivgut Theoretiker hier wäre). Denn es ist durchaus möglich und auch bekannt, dass es Anarchisten gibt, die staatliches Handeln so sehr verabscheuen, dass sie es vorziehen würden, die so genannten öffentlichen Güter gar nicht zu haben, die vom Staat zur Verfügung gestellt werden.[^16] In jedem Fall, selbst wenn dem Argument bisher zugestimmt wurde, ist der Übergang von der Aussage, dass die öffentlichen Güter wünschenswert sind, zu der Aussage, dass sie daher vom Staat bereitgestellt werden sollten, alles andere als schlüssig, da dies keineswegs die Wahl ist, mit welcher man konfrontiert ist. Da Geld oder andere Ressourcen von möglichen alternativen Nutzungen zur Finanzierung der vermeintlich erwünschten öffentlichen Güter entzogen werden müssen, ist die einzig relevante und angemessene Frage, ob diese alternativen Nutzungen, zu denen das Geld verwendet werden könnte (d.h. die privaten Güter, die erworben werden hätten können, aber jetzt nicht gekauft werden können, weil das Geld für öffentliche Güter ausgegeben wird) sind wertvoller und dringlicher als die öffentlichen Güter. Und die Antwort auf diese Frage ist ganz klar. Was die Bewertungen der Verbraucher anbelangt, so hoch der absolute Wert auch sein mag, ist der Wert der öffentlichen Güter relativ niedriger als der der konkurrierenden privaten Güter, wenn man den Verbrauchern die Wahl gelassen (und ihnen keine Alternative aufgezwungen) hätte. Offensichtlich hätten sie ihr Geld lieber anders ausgegeben (sonst wäre keine Gewalt nötig gewesen). Dies beweist zweifelsfrei, dass die Ressourcen, die für die Bereitstellung öffentlicher Güter verwendet werden, verschwendet werden, weil sie den Verbrauchern Güter oder Dienstleistungen liefern, die bestenfalls zweitrangig sind. Kurzum, selbst wenn man davon ausginge, dass es öffentliche Güter gibt, die sich deutlich von privaten Gütern unterscheiden lassen, und selbst wenn ein gegebenes öffentliches Gut nützlich wäre, würden öffentliche Güter immer noch mit privaten Gütern konkurrieren. Und es gibt nur eine Methode, um herauszufinden, ob sie dringender erwünscht sind und in welchem Umfang, oder *sinngemäß*, ob und inwieweit ihre Produktion auf Kosten der Nichtproduktion oder reduzierte Produktion von dringend benötigten privaten Gütern: indem alles von frei konkurrierenden privaten Unternehmen bereitgestellt wird. Entgegen der von den Theoretikern der Kollektivgüter geäußerten Folgerung erzwingt also die Logik, das Ergebnis zu akzeptieren, dass nur ein reines Marktsystem die Rationalität einer Entscheidung, ein öffentliches Gut zu produzieren, aus der Sicht der Verbraucher sichern kann. Und nur unter einer rein kapitalistischen Ordnung könnte sichergestellt werden, dass auch die Entscheidung darüber, wie viel öffentliches Gut produziert werden soll (sofern es überhaupt produziert werden sollte), vernünftig ist.[^17] Nicht weniger als eine semantische Revolution von wahrhaft Orwellschen Dimensionen wäre erforderlich, um ein anderes Ergebnis zu erzielen. Nur wenn man bereit ist, jemandes "Nein" so zu interpretieren, dass es wirklich "Ja" bedeutet, bedeutet das "Nicht-Kaufen von etwas", dass es wirklich "gegenüber dem bevorzugt wird, was der Nichtkaufende tut, anstatt es zu kaufen" "Freiheit", "nicht-vertragsgemäß", was "Vertrag" bedeutet, und so weiter, könnte die Argumentation der Kollektivgut Theoretiker "bewiesen" werden.[^18] Aber wie können wir dann sicher sein, dass sie das wirklich meinen, was sie zu meinen scheinen, wenn sie sagen, was sie sagen, und nicht etwa das genaue Gegenteil meinen, oder gar nichts mit einem bestimmten Inhalt meinen, sondern nur plappern? Könnten wir nicht. Murray N. Rothbard hat also völlig recht, wenn er zu den Bestrebungen der Ideologen der Kollektivgüter Stellung nimmt, die Existenz sogenannter Marktversagen aufgrund der Nichtproduktion oder einer quantitativ oder qualitativ "mangelhaften" Produktion öffentlicher Güter zu beweisen. Er schreibt,

> [s]olch eine Ansicht vertritt die vollkommene ökonomische Wissenschaft, dass marktwirtschaftliches Handeln *immer* optimal ist. Es ist optimal, nicht vom Standpunkt der persönlichen ethischen Ansichten eines Ökonomen aus, sondern vom Standpunkt des freien, freiwilligen Handelns aller Beteiligten und der Befriedigung der frei geäußerten Bedürfnisse der Konsumenten. Eine Regierungseinmischung wird sich daher notwendigerweise und immer von einem solchen Optimum <>weg</em>bewegen.[^19]

Tatsächlich sind die Argumente, die angeblich Marktversagen beweisen, offensichtlich absurd. Von ihrer Verkleidung des Fachjargons abgesehen beweisen sie nur Folgendes: Ein Markt ist nicht perfekt, da er durch das Nichtangriffsprinzip gekennzeichnet ist, das von Knappheit geprägten Bedingungen auferlegt wird, und so bestimmte Güter oder Dienstleistungen, die nur produziert und bereitgestellt werden könnten, wenn Aggression erlaubt wäre, nicht produziert werden. Auch wenn es logisch klingt, würde jedoch kein Markttheoretiker es jemals wagen, dies zu leugnen. Aber, und das ist entscheidend, kann diese "Unvollkommenheit" des Marktes sowohl moralisch als auch ökonomisch verteidigt werden, während die vermeintlichen "Vollkommenheiten" der Märkte, die von den Theoretikern der Kollektivgüter propagiert werden, dies nicht können.[^20] Es ist auch wahr, dass eine Beendigung der gegenwärtigen Praxis des Staates, öffentliche Güter zu liefern, eine Veränderung der bestehenden sozialen Struktur und der Verteilung des Reichtums bedeuten würde. Eine solche Umbesetzung würde für manche Menschen sicherlich Not bedeuten. Gerade deshalb gibt es einen breiten öffentlichen Widerstand gegen eine Politik der Privatisierung staatlicher Funktionen, obwohl auf lange Sicht der gesamte soziale Wohlstand durch diese Politik noch verstärkt würde. Sicher kann diese Tatsache jedoch nicht als stichhaltiges Argument für das Versagen von Märkten akzeptiert werden. If a man has been allowed to hit other people on the head and is now not permitted to continue with this practice, he is certainly hurt. But one would hardly accept that as a valid excuse for upholding the old (hitting) rules. He is harmed, but harming him means substituting a social order in which every consumer has an equal right to determine what and how much of anything is produced, for a system in which some consumers have the right to determine in what respect other consumers are not allowed to buy voluntarily what they want with the means justly acquired by them and at their disposal. Certainly, such a substitution would be preferable from the point of view of all consumers as voluntary consumers.

By force of logical reasoning, one must accept Molinari’s conclusion that for the sake of consumers, all goods and services be provided by markets.[^21] It is not only false that clearly distinguishable categories of goods exist, which would render special amendments to the general thesis of capitalism’s economic superiority necessary; even if they did exist, no special reason could be found why these supposedly special public goods should not also be produced by private enterprises, since they invariably stand in competition with private goods. In fact, in spite of all the propaganda from the public goods theorists, the greater efficiency of markets as compared with the state is increasingly realized with respect to more and more of the alleged public goods. Confronted daily with experience, hardly anyone seriously studying these matters could deny that nowadays markets could produce postal services, railroads, electricity, telephone, education, money, roads and so on more effectively than the state, i.e., more to the liking of consumers. Yet people generally shy away from accepting in one particular sector what logic forces upon them: in the production of security. Hence, for the rest of this chapter I will turn my attention to explaining the superior functioning of a capitalist economy in this particular area—a superiority whose logical case has already been made by now, but which shall be rendered more persuasive once some empirical material is added to the analysis and it is studied as a problem in its own right.[^22]

How would a system of nonmonopolistic, competing producers of security work? It should be clear from the outset that in answering this question one is leaving the realm of purely logical analysis and hence the answers must lack the certainty, the apodictic character of pronouncements on the validity of the public goods theory. The problem faced is precisely analogous to that of asking how a market would solve the problem of hamburger production, especially if up to this point hamburgers had been produced exclusively by the state and hence no one could draw on past experience. Only tentative answers could be formulated. No one could possibly know the exact structure of the hamburger industry—how many competing companies would come into existence, what importance this industry might have compared to others, what the hamburgers would look like, how many different sorts of hamburgers would appear on the market and perhaps disappear again because of a lack of demand, and so on. No one could know all of the circumstances and the changes that would influence the very structure of the hamburger industry—changes in the demands of various consumer groups, changes in technology, changes in the prices of various goods that affect the industry directly or indirectly, and so on. It must be stressed that although similar issues arise concerning the private production of security, this by no means implies that nothing definitive can be said. Assuming certain general conditions of demand for security services (conditions that more or less realistically reflect the world as it presently is) what can and will be said is how different social orders of security production, characterized by different structural constraints under which they have to operate, will respond differently.[^23] Let me first analyze the specifics of monopolistic, state-run security production, for at least in this case one can draw on ample evidence regarding the validity of the conclusions reached and then compare this system with what could be expected if it were replaced by a nonmonopolistic one.

Even if security is considered to be a public good, in the allocation of scarce resources it must compete with other goods. What is spent on security can no longer be spent on other goods that also might increase consumer satisfaction. Moreover, security is not a single, homogeneous good, but rather consists of numerous components and aspects. There is not only prevention of crime, detection of criminals, and enforcement of the law, but there is also security from robbers, rapists, polluters, natural disasters, and so on. Moreover, security is not produced in a “lump,” but can be supplied in marginal units. In addition, different people attach different importance to security as a whole, and also to different aspects of the whole thing, depending on their personal characteristics, their past experiences with various factors of insecurity, and the time and place in which they happen to live.[^24] Here I address the fundamental economic problem of allocating scarce resources to competing uses, how can the state—an organization not financed exclusively by voluntary contributions and the sales of its products but rather partially or even wholly by taxes—decide how much security to produce, how much of each of its countless aspects, to whom and where to provide how much of what? The answer is that it has no rational way to decide this question. From the point of view of the consumers, its response to their security demands must be considered arbitrary. Do we need one policeman and one judge, or 100,000 of each? Should they be paid $100 a month or $10,000? Should the policemen, however many we might have, spend more time patrolling the streets, chasing robbers, and recovering stolen loot, or spying on participants in victimless crimes such as prostitution, drug use, or smuggling? And should the judges spend more time and energy hearing divorce cases, traffic violations, cases of shoplifting, and murder, or antitrust cases? Clearly, all of these questions must be answered somehow because as long as there is scarcity and we do not live in the Garden of Eden, the time and money spent on one thing cannot be spent on another. The state must answer these questions, too, but whatever it does, it does it without being subject to the profit-and-loss criterion. Hence, its action is arbitrary and necessarily involves countless wasteful misallocations from the consumer’s viewpoint.[^25] Independent to a large degree of consumer wants, the state-employed security producers instead do what they like. They hang around instead of doing anything, and if they do work they prefer doing what is easiest or work where they can wield power rather than serving consumers. Police officers drive around a lot, hassle petty traffic violators, spend huge amounts of money investigating victimless crimes that many people (i.e., nonparticipants) do not like but that few would be willing to spend their money on to fight, as they are not immediately affected by them. Yet with respect to what consumers want most urgently—the prevention of hardcore crime (i.e., crimes with victims), the apprehension and effective punishment of hard-core criminals, the recovery of loot, and the securement of compensation of victims of crimes from the aggressors—the police are notoriously inefficient, in spite of ever higher budget allocations.

Furthermore, whatever state-employed police or judges happen to do (arbitrary as it must be), they will tend to do poorly because their income is more or less independent of the consumer’s evaluations of their services. Thus one observes police arbitrariness and brutality and the slowness in the judicial process. Moreover, it is remarkable that neither the police nor the judicial system offers consumers anything even faintly resembling a service contract in which it is laid down in unambiguous terms what procedure the consumer can expect to be set in motion in a specific situation. Rather, both operate in a contractual void that over time allows them to change their rules of procedure arbitrarily and that explains the truly ridiculous fact that the settlement of disputes between police and judges on the one hand and private citizens on the other is not assigned to an independent third party, but to another policeman or judge who shares employers with one party—the government—in the dispute.

[^16]: See on this argument Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” p. 533\. Incidentally, the existence of one single anarchist also invalidates all references to Pareto optimality as a criterion for economically legitimate state action.

[^17]: Essentially the same reasoning that leads one to reject the socialist-statist theory built on the allegedly unique character of public goods as defined by the criterion of nonexcludability, also applies when, instead, such goods are defined by means of the criterion of nonrivalrous consumption (see notes 6 and 12 above). For one thing, in order to derive the normative statement that they *should* be so offered from the statement of fact that goods that allow nonrivalrous consumption *would not* be offered on the free market to as many consumers as could be, this theory would face exactly the same problem of requiring a justifiable ethics. Moreover, the utilitarian reasoning is blatantly wrong, too. To reason, as the public goods theorists do, that the free-market practice of excluding free riders from the enjoyment of goods that would permit nonrivalrous consumption at zero marginal costs would indicate a suboptimal level of social welfare and hence would require compensatory state action is faulty on two related counts. First, cost is a subjective category and can never be objectively measured by any outside observer. Hence, to say that additional free riders could be admitted at no cost is totally inadmissible. In fact, if the subjective costs of admitting more consumers at no charge were indeed zero, the private owner-producer of the good in question would do so. If he does not do so, this reveals that the costs for him are *not* zero. The reason may be his belief that to do so would reduce the satisfaction available to the other consumers and so would tend to depress the price for his product; or it may simply be his dislike for uninvited free riders as, for instance, when I object to the proposal that I turn over my less-thancapacity-filled living room to various self-inviting guests for nonrivalrous consumption. In any case, since for whatever reason the cost cannot be assumed to be zero, it is then fallacious to speak of a market failure when certain goods are not handed out free of charge. On the other hand, welfare losses would indeed become unavoidable if one accepted the public goods theorists’ recommendation of letting goods that allegedly allow for nonrivalrous consumption to be provided free of charge by the state. Besides the insurmountable task of determining what fulfills this criterion, the state, independent of voluntary consumer purchases as it is, would first off face the equally insoluble problem of rationally determining *how much* of the public good to provide. Clearly, since even public goods are not free goods but are subject to “crowding” at some level of use, there is no stopping point for the state, because at any level of supply there would still be users who would have to be excluded and who, with a larger supply, could enjoy a free ride. But even if this problem could be solved miraculously, in any case the (necessarily inflated) cost of production and operation of the public goods distributed free of charge for nonrivalrous consumption would have to be paid for by taxes. And this then, i.e., the fact that consumers would have been coerced into enjoying their free rides, again proves beyond any doubt that these public goods, too, are of inferior value from the point of view of consumers to the competing private goods that they now no longer can acquire.

[^18]: The most prominent modern champions of Orwellian double talk are Buchanan and Tullock (see their works cited in note 3 above). They claim that government is founded by a “constitutional contract” in which everyone “conceptually agrees” to submit to the coercive powers of government with the understanding that everyone else is subject to it too. Hence government is only *seemingly* coercive but *really* voluntary. There are several evident objections to this curious argument. First, there is no empirical evidence whatsoever for the contention that any constitution has ever been voluntarily accepted by everyone concerned. Worse, the very idea of all people voluntarily coercing themselves is simply inconceivable, much in the same way as it is inconceivable to deny the law of contradiction. For if the voluntarily accepted coercion is voluntary, then it would have to be possible to revoke one’s subjection to the constitution, and the state would be no more than a voluntarily joined club. If, however, one does not have the “right to ignore the state”—and that one does not have this right is, of course, the characteristic mark of a state as compared to a club—then it would be logically inadmissible to claim that one’s acceptance of state coercion is voluntary. Furthermore, even if all this were possible, the constitutional contact could still not claim to bind anyone except the original signers of the constitution.

How can Buchanan and Tullock come up with such absurd ideas? By a semantic trick. What was “inconceivable” and “no agreement” in pre-Orwellian talk is for them “conceptually possible” and a “conceptual agreement.” For a most instructive short exercise in this sort of reasoning in leaps and bounds, see James Buchanan, “A Contractarian Perspective on Anarchy,” in idem, *Freedom in Constitutional Contract* (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1977). Here we learn (p. l7) that even the acceptance of the 55 mph speed limit is possibly voluntary (Buchanan is not quite sure) since it ultimately rests on all of us conceptually agreeing on the constitution, and that Buchanan is not really a statist, but in truth an anarchist (p. 11).

[^19]: Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, p. 887.

[^20]: This, first of all, should be kept in mind whenever one has to assess the validity of statist-interventionist arguments such as the following, by John Maynard Keynes (“The End of Laissez Faire,” in idem, *Collected Writings*, London: Macmillan, 1972, vol. IX, p. 291):

> The most important Agenda of the state relates not to those activities which private individuals are already fulfilling but to those functions which fall outside the sphere of the individual, to those decisions which are made by no one if the state does not make them. The important thing for government is not to do things which individuals are doing already and to do them a little better or a little worse: but to do those things which are not done at all.

This reasoning not only *appears* phony, it truly is.

[^21]: Some libertarian minarchists object that the existence of a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of a common body of law, and hence a government as a monopolistic judge and enforcement agency. (See, for example, John Hospers, *Libertarianism* [Los Angeles: Nash, 1971]; Tibor Machan, *Human Rights and Human Liberties* [Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1975].) Now it is certainly correct that a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of those rules that underlie its operation. But from this it does not follow that this task must be entrusted to a monopolistic agency. In fact, a common language or sign-system is also presupposed by the market; but one would hardly think it convincing to conclude that hence the government must ensure the observance of the rules of language. Like the system of language, then, the rules of market behavior emerge spontaneously and can be enforced by the “invisible hand” of self-interest. Without the observance of common rules of speech, people could not reap the advantages that communication offers, and without the observance of common rules of conduct, people could not enjoy the benefits of the higher productivity of an exchange economy based on the division of labor. In addition, as I indicated above, independent of any government the nonaggression principle underlying the operation of markets can be defended a priori as just. Moreover, as I will argue in the conclusion of this chapter, it is precisely a competitive system of law-administration and law-enforcement that generates the greatest possible pressure to elaborate and enact rules of conduct that incorporate the highest degree of *consensus* conceivable. And of course the very rules that do just this are those that a priori reasoning establishes as the logically necessary presupposition of argumentation and argumentative agreement.

[^22]: Incidentally, the same logic that would force one to accept the idea of the production of security by private business as economically the best solution to the problem of consumer satisfaction also forces one, so far as moral-ideological positions are concerned, to abandon the political theory of classical liberalism and take the small but nevertheless decisive step (from there) to the theory of libertarianism, or private property anarchism. Classical liberalism, with Ludwig von Mises as its foremost representative in the twentieth century, advocates a social system based on the nonaggression principle. And this is also what libertarianism advocates. But classical liberalism then wants to have this principle enforced by a monopolistic agency (the government, the state)—an organization, that is, which is not exclusively dependent on voluntary, contractual support by the consumers of its respective services, but instead has the right to unilaterally determine its own income, i.e., the taxes to be imposed on consumers in order to do its job in the area of security production. Now, however plausible this might sound, it should be clear that it is inconsistent. Either the principle of nonaggression is valid, in which case the state as a privileged monopolist is immoral, or business built on and around aggression—the use of force and of noncontractual means of acquiring resources—is valid, in which case one must toss out the first theory. It is impossible to sustain both contentions and not to be inconsistent unless, of course, one could provide a principle that is more fundamental than both the nonaggression principle and the states’ right to aggressive violence and from which both, with the respective limitations regarding the domains in which they are valid, can be logically derived. However, liberalism never provided any such principle, nor will it ever be able to do so, since, to argue in favor of anything presupposes one’s right to be free of aggression. Given the fact then that the principle of nonaggression cannot be argumentatively contested as morally valid without implicitly acknowledging its validity, by force of logic one is committed to abandoning liberalism and accepting instead its more radical child: libertarianism, the philosophy of pure capitalism, which demands that the production of security be undertaken by private business too.

[^23]: On the problem of competitive security production, see Gustave de Molinari, *Production of Security*; Murray N. Rothbard, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 1; idem, *For A New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 12; W.C. Woolridge, *Uncle Sam the Monopoly Man* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1970), chaps. 5–6; Morris and Linda Tannehill, *The Market for Liberty* (New York: Laissez Faire Books, 1984), part 2.

[^24]: See Manfred Murck, *Soziologie der Öffentlichen Sicherheit* (Frankfurt: Campus, 1980).

[^25]: To say that the process of resource allocation becomes arbitrary in the absence of the effective functioning of the profit-loss criterion does not mean that the decisions that somehow have to he made are not subject to any kind of constraint and hence are pure whim. They are not, and any such decisions face certain constraints imposed on the decision maker. If, for instance, the allocation of production factors is decided democratically, then it evidently must appeal to the majority. But if a decision is constrained in this way or if it is made in any other way, it is still arbitrary from the point of view of voluntarily buying or not-buying consumers.

Regarding *democratically* controlled allocations, various deficiencies have become quite evident. As, for example, James Buchanan and Richard E. Wagner write (*The Consequences of Mr. Keynes* [London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1978], p. 19):

> Market competition is continuous; at each purchase, a buyer is able to select among competing sellers. Political competition is intermittent; a decision is binding generally for a fixed number of years. Market competition allows several competitors to survive simultaneously…. Political competition leads to an all-or-nothing outcome…. In market competition the buyer can be reasonably certain as to just what it is that he will receive from his purchase. In political competition, the buyer is in effect purchasing the services of an agent, whom he cannot bind…. Moreover, because a politician needs to secure the cooperation of a majority of politicians, the meaning of a vote for a politician is less clean than that of a “vote” for a private firm.

See also James M. Buchanan, “Individual Choice in Voting and the Market,” in idem, *Fiscal Theory and Political Economy* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1962); for a more general treatment of the problem Buchanan and Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent.*

What has commonly been overlooked, though—especially by those who try to make a virtue of the fact that a democracy gives equal voting power to everyone, whereas consumer sovereignty allows for unequal “votes”—is the most important deficiency of all: Under a system of consumer sovereignty people might cast unequal votes but, in any case, they exercise control exclusively over things that they acquired through original appropriation or contract and hence are forced to act morally. Under a democracy of production everyone is assumed to have something to say regarding things one did not so acquire; hence, one is permanently invited thereby not only to create legal instability with all its negative effects on the process of capital formation, but, moreover to act immorally. See on this also Ludwig von Mises, *Socialism* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1981), chap. 31.