### Positivisme dan Penghancuran Relativistik dari Etika dan Ekonomi

Tidak ada doktrin filosofis lainnya di zaman modern ini telah telah menyumbang lebih banyak untuk penyebaran relativisme dari pada positivisme. Berakar dalam tradisi empirisme klasik dari Locke dan Hume, itu muncul pertama kali di Wina sekitar pergantian abad dan kemudian didirikan dengan sendirinya, khususnya setelah emigrasi para pemimpin intelektualnya ke A.S. selama tahun 1930an, sebagai kepercayaan filosofis dominan dunia Barat.[^11]

[^11]: Baca karangan Viktor Kraft, *Der Wiener Kreis* (Vienna: Springer, 1968); Stegmüller, *Hauptströmungen der Gegenwartsphilosophie* (Stuttgart: Kroner, 1965), vol. 1, chaps. IX–X.

Sedangkan prinsip dasar dari positivisme berjumlah sebuah penolakan klaim rasionalisme seperti yang diterapkan pada alam serta ilmu-ilmu sosial, dampaknya telah sangat kuat di kedua. Yang pasti, tidak ada keraguan bahwa bahkan ilmu-ilmu pengetahuan alam, dan terutama logika dan protofisika, telah menderita dari pengaruh positivisme.[^12] Bagaimanapun, untuk alasan yang sudah disebutkan, untuk menggagalkan rasionalisme dalam bidang ini akan sangat sulit. Mengadopsi sudut pandang relativis yang pada akhirnya akan jumlah untuk meninggalkan intelektual berarti bagi orang itu sendiri yang sukses penanganan dari alam, dan tidak ada yang mampu membedakan antara keberhasilan dan kegagalan sistematis bunga dalam membayar harga tersebut. Dalam ilmu-ilmu sosial pada hal-hal yang berbeda. Sementara hingga sekarang murni intelektual kasus sosial relativisme memiliki hampir tidak muncul baik yang didirikan dari kasus ini untuk ilmu-ilmu pengetahuan alam, dan sementara saya menunjukkan hal berikut untuk menjadi sepenuhnya tidak berdasar, advokasi dan mengadopsi relativisme dalam ilmu-ilmu sosial adalah tidak merugikan diri sendiri dalam arti yang sama seperti dalam ilmu alam. Jika salah satu adalah untuk menyangkal keberadaan mutlak hukum ekonomi dan/atau etika dan kemungkinan kemajuan sosial, harga yang harus dibayar juga. Selain itu, harga tidak akan selalu harus dibayar secara langsung, dan tidak akan selalu ditanggung secara penuh oleh siapa pun diadopsi dan bertindak berdasarkan pandangan ini. Sebaliknya, dia yang diadopsi itu bisa mengeksternalisasi biaya pandangannya ke orang lain; oleh karenanya, sejauh relativisme dapat berfungsi sebagai sarana untuk meningkatkan kesejahteraan sendiri dengan mengorbankan pengurangan yang lain, individu bisa memiliki kepentingan dalam advokasi relativisme sosial.[^13]

[^12]: Baca karangan Kambartel, *Erfahrung und Struktur*, esp. bab. 6; baca juga catatan 18 di bawah ini.

[^13]: Baca karangan Mises, *Human Action*, bab. III.

Hal inilah yang menjelaskan mengapa pengaruh positivisme telah membuat dirinya merasa dalam ilmu-ilmu sosial pada khususnya. Apakah ini telah dimaksudkan oleh positivis atau tidak, pesan filosofis mereka itu dengan cepat diakui oleh kekuatan yang sama seperti senjata ideologis yang hebat dalam mengejar tujuan mereka sendiri untuk meningkatkan kontrol mereka atas orang lain dan memperkaya diri sendiri dengan mengorbankan orang lain. Dengan demikian, dukungan yang begitu melimpah itu diberikan pada positivis gerakan, dan gerakan ini sebagai balas budi, menghancurkan ekonomi dan etika tertentu sebagai benteng tradisional sosial rasionalisme dan memberantas dari kesadaran publik, suatu pengetahuan yang luas pernah dibentuk tampaknya tetap menjadi bagian dari warisan pemikiran Barat dan peradaban.[^14]

[^14]: Baca karangan Mises, *Human Action*, bagian 7; idem, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1978), esp. bab. 5–8, yang diakhiri dengan pernyataan tersebut:

::::> Sejauh prinsip empiris positivisme logis yang mengacu pada metode eksperimental dari ilmu-ilmu pengetahuan alam, itu hanya menegaskan apa yang tidak dipertanyakan oleh siapa pun. Sejauh ini menolak prinsip-prinsip epistemologis ilmu dari tindakan manusia, hal ini tidak hanya sepenuhnya salah. Hal ini juga dengan sadar dan sengaja merusak fondasi intelektual dari peradaban Barat. (hal. 133)

Yang pertama dan yang paling mendasar prinsip positivisme adalah ini: Pengetahuan mengenai realitas, atau pengetahuan *empiris* harus dapat diverifikasi atau setidaknya bisa dipalsukan oleh pengalaman; bahwa apapun yang diketahui oleh pengalaman bisa saja sebaliknya, atau, dengan kata lain, bahwa tidak ada sesuatu tentang realitas dapat diketahui dengan benar secara apriori; bahwa semua proposisi benar apriori adalah *analitis* pernyataan-pernyataan yang tidak faktual konten apapun, tapi yang benar dengan konvensi, yang mewakili hanya informasi yang bersifat tautologis tentang penggunaan simbol-simbol dan aturan transformasi; bahwa semua pernyataan yang baik empiris maupun analitis, tetapi tidak pernah keduanya; dan karenanya, itu pernyataan yang normatif, karena mereka tidak empiris maupun analitis, tidak secara sah mengandung klaim kebenaran apapun, tetapi harus dianggap hanya sebagai ekspresi emosi, dengan mengatakan, pada dasarnya, tidak lebih dari "wow" atau "grrr."[^15]

[^15]: Baca secara khusus karangan Alfred J. Ayer, *Language, Truth, and Logic* (New York: Dover, 1946).

Prinsip kedua dari positivisme merumuskan ekstensi atau lebih tepatnya aplikasi pertama untuk masalah penjelasan ilmiah. Menurut positivisme, untuk menjelaskan fenomena yang nyata adalah untuk merumuskan sebuah pernyataan dari tipe "jika ::A::, then ::B::" atau, sebaiknya variabel-variabel yang memungkinkan pengukuran kuantitatif, "jika terjadi peningkatan (atau penurunan) ::A::, maka peningkatan (atau penurunan ::B:: ". Sebagai sebuah pernyataan yang mengacu pada realitas (dengan ::A:: dan ::B:: menjadi fenomena nyata, yaitu), validitasnya tidak dapat ditetapkan dengan pasti dengan memeriksa proposisi sendiri atau proposisi yang satu pertanyaan yang didapat, pada gilirannya dapat disimpulkan secara logis, tapi akan selalu tetap hipotetis dan tergantung pada hasil dari pengalaman masa depan yang tidak dapat diketahui sebelumnya. Harus pengalaman mengkonfirmasi hipotesis penjelasan, yaitu, harus mengamati satu contoh di mana ::B:: memang diikuti ::A::, seperti yang diperkirakan, ini tidak akan membuktikan bahwa hipotesis ini benar, karena ::A:: dan ::B:: umum, istilah abstrak ("universal, sebagai lawan untuk nama yang tepat") yang mengacu pada fenomena atau peristiwa yang ada (atau, setidaknya *mungkin*, pada prinsipnya sama) yang tidak terbatas jumlah kasus, dan oleh karena itu pengalaman nanti masih bisa mungkin memalsukan itu. Dan jika sebuah pengalaman yang dipalsukan hipotesis, yaitu, jika seseorang mengamati contoh ::A:: yang tidak diikuti oleh ::B::, ini tidak akan menjadi penentu baik, karena itu masih mungkin bahwa hipotesis yang berkaitan dengan fenomena-fenomena yang memang terhubung dan beberapa lainnya yang sebelumnya diabaikan dan tidak terkendali keadaan atau variabel itu hanya mencegah hipotesis hubungan dari yang benar-benar diamati. Sebuah pemalsuan hanya akan membuktikan bahwa hipotesis dalam penyelidikan itu tidak benar-benar benar seperti berdiri dan diperlukan beberapa perbaikan, beberapa spesifikasi dari variabel-variabel tambahan yang satu akan memiliki untuk mengontrol dalam rangka untuk dapat mengamati hipotesis hubungan antara: ::A:: dan ::B::. Bagaimanapun, pemalsuan tidak akan pernah terbukti satu kali dan untuk semuanya, suatu hubungan diantara beberapa fenomena tertentu tidak ada.[^16]

[^16]: See Karl R. Popper, *The Logic of Scientific Discovery* (New York: Basic Books, 1959); idem, *Conjectures and Refutations* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1969); Carl G. Hempel, *Aspects of Scientific Explanations* (New York: Free Press, 1970); Ernest Nagel, *The Structure of Science* (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1961).

Finally, positivism claims that these two related tenets apply universally, to all fields of knowledge (the thesis of “the unity of science”): No a priori knowledge of nature nor of the social reality of human actions and knowledge exists; and the structure of scientific explanations is the same regardless of the subject matter.[^17]

[^17]: See Paul Oppenheim and Hilary Putnam, “Unity of Science as a Working Hypothesis,” in H. Feigl, ed., *Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1967), vol. 2.

Assuming for the moment this doctrine to be correct, it is easy to recognize its relativistic implications. Ethics is not a cognitive discipline. Any normative statement is just as well-, or rather, ill-founded as any other one. But then, what is wrong with everyone trying to impose on others whatever one wishes? Surely nothing. Everything is allowed. Ethics is reduced to the question “what can I get away with?” What better message could there be for those in power: for the cannibal king, for the slave owner, or for the holders of government office! It is precisely what they want to hear: might is and makes right.

Similarly, they must be thrilled about the message of positivism as regards the positive sciences. In the natural sciences, the positivist doctrine is relatively harmless. Disciplines such as logic and protophysics, whose propositions are generally considered a priori true (nonfalsifiable by experience), are interpreted by positivists as containing no “real” knowledge at all, as empirically empty formalisms. This view has helped legitimize and further the degeneration of parts of logic and mathematics into meaningless symbolic games, of which the general public has remained largely ignorant due to the arcane nature of the subject.[^18] But it has not, nor could it have, changed the fact that at least some propositions of logic and mathematics are employed as the very foundation of the empirical natural sciences, and hence are actually treated as containing empirical information, though of a nonhypothetical kind.[^19] Nor is there much harm in the positivist view of the empirical natural sciences, such as physics. Its methodology, according to which one can never definitively establish whether a hypothesized relationship between two or more variables exists or not, offers the possibility that one might cling to one’s hypotheses regardless of all seemingly falsifying experiences, for one could always blame a previously neglected variable for one’s predictive failures. However, as explained above no one trying to produce some given physical event would systematically prefer finding excuses for not reaching this goal over actually reaching it because he alone would have to pay the price for such stubbornness.

[^18]: See Kambartel, *Erfahrung und Struktur*, esp. pp. 236–42\. The rationalist conception of logic and mathematics is summarized by Gottlob Frege’s dictum that “it follows from the truth of the axioms, that they do not contradict each other.” The positivist-formalist interpretation, on the other hand, is formulated by the young D. Hilbert: “If the arbitrarily assumed axioms do not lead to contradictory implications, then they are true, and the objects defined by the axioms exist” (quoted from Kambartel, p. 239).

::::The advance of formalism, then, explains Kambartel, has far-reaching consequences.

::::> The retreat of mathematics from all practical justification, and from the corresponding epistemological justification of formalism, is itself a practical decision of the utmost importance. It is the abandonment of practical justification and, since formal systems without a meaningful interpretation of their starting point cannot justify anything, ultimately of the justification of propositions altogether. (p. 241)

::::In consequence,

::::> many formal analyses become a high-bred game of an interested few, although without the public noticing it, because of its inability to attain the level of discussion that is required here to determine the borderline between theory and game. (p. 238)

[^19]: See Hans Lenk, “Logikbegründung und Rationaler Kritizismus,” *Zeitschrift für Philosophische Forschung* 24 (1970); K.O. Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*, vol. II, pp. 406–10.

In the realm of the social sciences, however, where the costs of one’s actions can be externalized onto others, this possibility of immunizing one’s hypotheses from falsification offers welcome opportunities to those in power.

Consider some typical economic propositions: Whenever an exchange is not voluntary but is coerced, such as highway robbery or taxation, one exchange party profits at the expense of the other. Or: Whenever minimum wage laws are enforced that require wage rates to be higher than existing market wages, involuntary unemployment will result. Or: Whenever the quantity of money is increased while the demand for money is unchanged, the purchasing power of money will fall. Or: Any supply of money is “optimal” such that no increase in the supply of money can raise the overall standard of living (while it can have redistributive effects). Or: Collective ownership of all factors of production makes cost-accounting impossible, and thus leads to a lower output in terms of consumer evaluations. Or: Taxation of income producers raises their effective time preference rate, and thus leads to a lower output of goods produced. Apparently, these propositions contain knowledge about reality, yet they do not seem to be falsifiable but are true by definition.[^20] However, according to positivism this cannot be so. Insofar as they claim to be empirically meaningful statements, they must be hypotheses subject to empirical confirmation or falsification. One can formulate the very opposite of the above propositions without thereby stating anything that could be recognized from the outset, a priori, as false (and nonsensical). Experience would have to decide the matter. Thus, in assuming the positivist doctrine, the highway robber, taxman, union official or the Federal Reserve Board would act legitimately, from a scientific point of view, in claiming that taxation benefits the taxed and increases productive output, minimum wage laws increase employment, and the creation of paper money generates all-around prosperity. As a good positivist, one would have to admit that these are merely hypotheses, too. With the predicted effects being benevolent, however, surely they should be put into effect and tried out. After all, one should not close one’s eyes to new experience, and one should always be willing to react flexibly and open-mindedly, depending on the outcome of such an experience. However, if the outcome is not as hypothesized, and the robbed or taxed do not appear to benefit, employment actually decreases, or economic cycles rather than all-around prosperity ensue, the possibility of immunizing one’s hypotheses becomes a real, almost irresistibly tempting option. For why would the robber, the taxman, or the Federal Reserve Board *not* want to continuously play down all apparently falsifying experiences as merely accidental, so long as he can personally profit from conducting their robbing-, taxing-, or money-creating experiment? Why would he *not* want to interpret all apparent falsifications as experiences that had been produced by some unfortunately neglected circumstance and that would disappear and turn into their very opposite, revealing the true relationship between taxes, minimum wage laws, the creation of money, and prosperity once these circumstances were controlled?

[^20]: See on this the two foremost economic treatises of our times: Mises’s *Human Action*, and Rothbard’s *Man, Economy, and State*.

In fact, whatever empirical evidence one presents against these hypotheses, as soon as one adopts positivism and rejects the idea of formulating a *principled* case either for or against them as ill-conceived, the robber’s or the taxman’s case is safe from decisive criticism because any failure can be ascribed to an as yet uncontrolled intervening variable. Not even the most perfectly controlled experiment could change this situation. For it would never be possible to control all variables that might conceivably have an influence on the variable to be explained or the result to be produced. In practice, this would involve controlling literally all of the universe, and in theory no one even knows what all the variables which make up this universe *are*. No matter what the charges brought against the robber, the taxman, or the Federal Reserve Board, within the boundaries of the positivist methodology they will always be able to preserve and rescue the “hard-core” of their “research program” as the neo-Popperian positivist Lakatos would have called it. Experience only tells us that a particular experiment did not reach its goal, but it can never tell us if a slightly different one will produce any different results, or if it is possible to reach the goal of generating all-around prosperity by means of *any* form of robbery, taxation, or paper money creation.

The attitude toward positive economics that positivism fuels and that has indeed become characteristic of most contemporary power elites and their subsidized intellectual bodyguards is that of a relativist social engineer whose motto is “nothing can be known with certainty to be impossible in the realm of social phenomena and there is nothing that one might not want to try out on one’s fellowmen, so long as one keeps an open mind.”[^21]

[^21]: See also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989), chap. 6; idem, “The Intellectual Cover for Socialism,” *Free Market* (February 1988).

The fact that positivism supports the mentality of social relativism does not prove it wrong. However, suspicion regarding its validity seems appropriate. It certainly is not obvious that there should be no rational ethical standard at all and that literally “anything goes.” Nor is it intuitively plausible that economics should be either an empirically meaningless symbolic game (a system of analytic propositions), or a set of hypothetical, empirically falsifiable predictions concerning the outcome of human actions and interactions. In the former case it would be nothing but a waste of time, and in the latter economics would obviously be impotent and hence irrelevant (if anything, the baker in ancient Athens could have predicted the behavior of his fellowmen *better and with a higher degree of confidence* than his modern counterpart!). However, economic propositions such as those mentioned above are apparently neither meaningless nor irrelevant. Indeed, in light of the self-serving implications of positivism for those in power, it may well be suspected that positivism might come to be accepted even if it were false, and that it might continue even if its falsehoods were exposed—as they surely have been.

Each of the three interrelated premises of positivism is demonstrably false.[^22]

[^22]: See on the following Mises, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science*; Murray N. Rothbard, *Individualism and the Philosophy of the Social Sciences* (San Francisco: Cato, 1979); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); idem, “On Praxeology and the Praxeological Foundations of Epistemology and Ethics”; also Martin Hollis and Edward Nell, *Rational Economic Man* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975), Introduction.

Regarding positivism’s supposedly exhaustive classification of analytic, empirical, and emotive propositions one must ask: What, then, is the status of this very axiom? It must be either an analytical or an empirical proposition, or it must be an expression of emotions. If it is taken to be analytical, then it is merely empty verbal quibble, saying nothing about anything real, but only defining one sound or symbol by another. Hence, one would simply have to shrug one’s shoulders and reply “so what?” The same response would be appropriate if the positivist argument were taken to be an empirical proposition. If this were the case, it would have to be admitted that the proposition might well be wrong and that one would be entitled to know the criterion on the basis of which one would have to decide whether or not it was. More decisively, as an empirical proposition it could merely state a historical fact and would thus be entirely irrelevant in determining whether or not it would be possible to ever produce propositions that were empirical and yet nonfalsifiable, or normative, yet nonemotive. Finally, if the positivist line of reasoning were assumed to be an emotive proposition, then according to its own doctrine it is cognitively meaningless and contains no claim to truth whatsoever, and one would not need to pay any more attention to it than to a barking dog.

Thus, one must conclude from the outset that positivism is an utter failure. It does not prove that there can be no rational ethic. Nor can it even be considered an epistemology, a justifiable theory of knowledge. For if it were, then positivism’s most basic premise would have to be a synthetic a priori statement (empirical, but unfalsifiable), whose existence positivism denies. Thus, one would have landed in the camp of social rationalism.

Similarly, positivism’s claim that all scientific explanations are hypothetical is self-defeating. (For what is the status of this explanation?)[^23] In order to see this, let it be assumed that an explanation relating two or more events has been found to fit one set of data, and that it is then applied to a second data set, presumably to undergo further empirical testing. Now one must ask: What is the presupposition which must be made in order to relate the second experience to the first one as either confirming or falsifying it? It might seem that if in the second instance of experience the observations of the first were repeated this would be a confirmation, and if not, a falsification. Clearly, the positivist methodology assumes this to be obvious. But this is not true. Experience only reveals that two or more observations regarding the temporal sequence of two or more types of events can be “neutrally” classified as “repetition” or “nonrepetition.” A neutral repetition only becomes a “positive” confirmation and a nonrepetition a “negative” falsification if independent of what can actually be discovered by experience, it is assumed that there are constant, time-invariantly operating causes. If, contrary to this, it is assumed that causes in the course of time might operate sometimes this way and sometimes that way, then these repetitive or nonrepetitive occurrences simply are and remain neutrally registered experiences, completely independent of one another. They are not in any way logically related to each other as confirming or falsifying one another. There is one experience and there is another, they are the same or they are different, but that is all there is to it; nothing else follows.

[^23]: See on the following also Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung*; see also supra chap. 7.

Thus, the presupposition of being able to say “falsify” or “confirm” is the constancy principle: the conviction that observable phenomena are in principle determined by causes that are constant and time-invariant in the way they operate. Only if the constancy principle is assumed to be valid does it follow from any failure to reproduce a result that there is something wrong with an original hypothesis; and only then can a successful reproduction indeed be interpreted as a confirmation. Obviously, this constancy principle is not itself based on or derived from experience. There is not only no observable link connecting events, but even if such a link existed, experience could not reveal whether or not it was time-invariant. The principle cannot be disproved by experience either, since any event which might appear to disprove it (such as a failure to duplicate some result) could be interpreted from the outset as if experience had shown here merely that one *particular* type of event was not the cause of another. However, to the extent that experience cannot exclude the possibility that *another* set of events might actually be found which would turn out to be time-invariant in its way of operating, the validity of the constancy principle cannot be disproved.

Nonetheless, although neither derived from nor disprovable by experience, the constancy principle is nothing less than the logically necessary presupposition for experiences which can be regarded as either confirming or falsifying each other (in contrast to isolated, logically unconnected experiences). Hence, since positivism assumes the existence of such logically related experiences, it must be concluded that it also assumes the existence of nonhypothetical knowledge about reality. It must assume that there are indeed time-invariantly operating causes, and it must assume this to be the case although experience could never possibly prove or disprove it. Once again, positivism turns out to be an inconsistent, contradictory philosophy. There exist nonhypothetical explanations of real things.

Finally (and by now not surprisingly), the positivist thesis of the unity of science turns out to be self-contradictory. Positivism claims that actions, just as any other phenomenon, can and must be explained by means of hypotheses which can be confirmed or refuted by experience. If this were the case, then—contrary to its own doctrine that there can be no a priori knowledge about reality—positivism would be forced to assume that with respect to actions time-invariantly operating causes exist. In order to proceed as positivism wants us to proceed—to relate different experiences regarding sequences of events as either confirming or falsifying each other—a constancy over time in the operation of causes must be presupposed (as has already been explained). However, if this were true and actions could indeed be conceived of as governed by time-invariantly operating causes, what about explaining the explainers, i.e., those who carry on the very process of hypothesis creation, of verification and falsification; all of us, that is, who act the way the positivists tell us to act? Evidently, to do all this—to assimilate confirming or falsifying experiences, to replace old hypotheses with new ones—one must assumedly be able to learn. However, if one can learn from experience, and the positivist is compelled to admit this, then one cannot know at any given time what one will know at later times and how one will act based on this knowledge. Rather, one can only reconstruct the causes of one’s actions after the event, since one can only explain one’s knowledge after one already possesses it. Thus, the positivist methodology applied to the field of knowledge and action, which contains knowledge as its necessary ingredient, is simply contradictory—a logical absurdity.

The constancy principle can and indeed must be assumed within the sphere of natural objects, i.e., for phenomena that are *not* constituted by one’s own knowledge or actions manifesting that knowledge (in this sphere the question of whether there are law-governed constants on the basis of which it becomes possible to make *exante* predictions is positively determined independent of experience, and empirical factors play a role only in determining which concrete variables are causally linked to which concrete effect variables, and which are not). With respect to knowledge and action, on the other hand, the constancy principle cannot be valid (in this sphere of phenomena, the question of whether or not there are constants is itself empirical in nature and can only be decided for a given variable on the basis of past experience, that is, *ex post*). And all this, which is definitely knowledge about something real, can be known apodictically. Hence, a methodological *dualism* rather than the positivist monism must be accepted and admitted as absolutely a priori true.
