Dalam usaha mereka untuk membantah argumen ini, Selgin dan White pertama-tama mengakui titik teoretis pusat: "Kami setuju bahwa preferensi waktu dan permintaan uang berbeda, dan bahwa perubahan dalam satu tidak berarti perubahan yang lain."[^39] Demikian juga:

> [t] topi memegang uang adalah salah satu bentuk tabungan tidak menyiratkan bahwa kenaikan permintaan uang identik dengan peningkatan total tabungan. Permintaan uang yang meningkat dapat menyertai penurunan permintaan untuk menahan aset lain, dan bukan pengurangan konsumsi; Oleh karena itu mungkin merupakan bagian dari perubahan cara menabung tanpa perubahan total tabungan. [^40]

Namun, jika permintaan uang yang meningkat tidak sama dengan peningkatan total tabungan, maka tidak mungkin mempertahankannya karena menyediakan dana pinjaman yang lebih besar dan peningkatan formasi modal (perluasan struktur produksi). Oleh karena itu, untuk menyelamatkan tesis pertumbuhan ekonomi mereka, segera setelah konsesi ini Selgin dan White mencoba untuk membawanya kembali lagi dengan alasan bahwa:

> Meskipun demikian [ketidaktahuan preferensi waktu dan permintaan uang meskipun] untuk menahan uang *adalah* untuk menahannya selama pengeluaran *nanti*, meskipun *berapa banyak nanti* adalah tidak diberi tanda (dan biasanya belum diputuskan oleh pemegang uang). Memegang uang untuk belanja nanti, daripada menghabiskannya untuk konsumsi sekarang, tidak menunda konsumsi ke masa depan.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks. Seperti yang ditunjukkan Hoppe sendiri, permintaan akan uang berasal dari kenyamanan sehingga memungkinkan seseorang membeli "barang konsumen atau produsen pada tanggal yang tidak pasti *masa depan*." Mungkin pertengkaran kita di sini hanyalah sekadar kata-kata. [^41]

Sayangnya, saran ini tidak berdasar. Alih-alih berdalih secara lisan, perselisihan itu bersifat substantif mengenai sifat uang.

Sulit untuk tidak menafsirkan dua pernyataan sebelumnya sebagai kontradiktif.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks. Selgin and White mencoba melepaskan diri dari kesimpulan ini dengan pergeseran semantik *ad hoc* yaitu, dalam menggambarkan uang sebagai barang masa depan. Essentially, their argument is that while increased money demand does not imply increased savings, it provides nonetheless for a larger loan fund, because money is held only to be spent “at uncertain *future* dates” (their emphasis), such that an increased demand for money is always and at the same time an increase in the demand for future goods.[^42] Yet money is demonstrably *not* a future good. Sebenarnya, saat uang itu habis-di masa depan-ia kehilangan semua utilitasnya untuk pemilik sekarang. It has utility only while and insofar as it is not spent, and its character as a present good stems from the omnipresent human condition of *uncertainty*.[^43]

Kesalahan dalam mengklasifikasikan uang sebagai kebaikan masa depan bisa terungkap secara ganda. Di satu sisi, secara negatif, dapat ditunjukkan bahwa asumsi ini masih menimbulkan kontradiksi. Untuk mendukung tesis mereka, Selgin and White mengklaim bahwa "memegang uang untuk belanja nanti, daripada menghabiskannya untuk konsumsi sekarang, tidak menunda konsumsi ke masa depan," menyiratkan bahwa memegang uang melibatkan pertukaran kebaikan masa depan (kepuasan) untuk yang sekarang. Pada kalimat berikutnya mereka mengakui bahwa uang yang ditahan tidak dibelanjakan baik barang konsumsi maupun barang produsen.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks. Namun mereka gagal untuk memperhatikan bahwa ini juga menyiratkan, sebagai konsekuensi lebih lanjut, bahwa memegang uang untuk belanja nanti, daripada membelanjakannya untuk produksi sekarang, tidak menunda produksi (dan karenanya konsumsi masa depan) ke masa depan.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks. Jika memegang uang menghalangi konsumsi dan produksi, bagaimanapun, maka menjadi tidak mungkin untuk mempertahankan bahwa pemegang uang telah menginvestasikannya di masa depan yang baik, karena tidak ada barang masa depan - entah barang konsumen atau barang - yang dihasilkan dari tindakan memegang uang dan yang berhak menjadi pemegangnya. Namun sebagai klaim untuk tidak ada barang masa depan apapun, uang akan menjadi tidak berharga.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks. Dengan implikasinya, jika uang tidak berharga (dan tidak ada yang mau menahan uang jika tidak ada nilainya), maka nilainya pastilah milik masa kini.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks.

Di sisi lain, secara positif, sifat uang sebagai barang yang baik secara paradigmatik dapat ditetapkan dengan bukti praksiologis.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks. Seperti yang telah dijelaskan oleh Mises dan Rothbard, secara umum ekuilibrium atau, lebih tepatnya, dalam konstruksi imajiner ekonomi yang berputar secara merata, tidak ada uang. Dengan segala ketidakpastian dengan asumsi yang dihapus, semua orang akan tahu persis istilah, waktu, dan lokasi dari semua pertukaran masa depan, dan semua pertukaran dapat diatur sebelumnya sesuai dan berbentuk pertukaran langsung daripada tidak langsung.

> Dalam sebuah sistem tanpa perubahan dimana tidak ada ketidakpastian apapun tentang masa depan, tidak ada yang butuh uang tunai. Setiap individu tahu persis jumlah uang yang akan dia butuhkan di masa mendatang. He is therefore in a position to lend all the funds he receives in such a way that the loans fall due on the date he will need them.[^44]

Meskipun tidak ada tempat untuk uang dalam pembangunan ekonomi yang berputar secara merata, bagaimanapun, ada dalam kerangkanya masa kini dan masa depan, sekarang dan nanti, awal sebuah tindakan dan penyelesaian selanjutnya, barang-barang konsumsi yang dapat diservis segera (barang sekarang) dan barang tidak langsung yang dapat diservis (barang masa depan), struktur produksi, dan tabungan dan investasi, yaitu pertukaran hadiah terhadap barang masa depan yang diatur oleh preferensi waktu. Jika ada, ini membuktikan lagi bahwa uang dan permintaan uang secara sistematis tidak terkait dengan konsumsi, produksi, dan preferensi waktu, dan bahwa sumber kegunaan uang pasti berbeda secara kategoris dari barang konsumsi dan barang produsen. Sumber kegunaan barang konsumen adalah kemudahan servisnya langsung dan sekarang, dan sumber kegunaan produsen adalah kemampuan tidak langsung masa depannya. Uang, sebaliknya, tidak dikonsumsi atau dipekerjakan dalam produksi.   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks. Hal ini tidak langsung dapat diservis (sebagai barang konsumen) atau secara tidak langsung berguna sebagai cara untuk memprioritaskan barang konsumsi masa depan (seperti barang produsen). Rather, the utility of money must be that of an *indirectly yet presently* serviceable good.

Outside the imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy, under the inescapable human condition of uncertainty, when the terms, times, and locations of all future exchanges cannot be predicted with certitude, and when action is by nature speculative and subject to error, man can conceivably demand goods no longer exclusively on account of their use-value (present or future), but also because of their value as *media of exchange* (for resale purposes). Dihadapkan dengan situasi di mana, karena tidak adanya kebetulan ganda dari keinginan, pertukaran langsung tidak mungkin dilakukan, manusia dapat mengevaluasi barang juga karena tingkat kemampuan pemasarannya, dan dapat mempertimbangkan untuk diperdagangkan kapanpun barang yang diperoleh dapat dibeli lebih berharga daripada diserahkan, sehingga kepemilikannya akan memudahkan perolehan barang dan jasa yang secara langsung maupun tidak langsung dapat diservis. Selain itu, karena ini adalah satu-satunya fungsi dari media pertukaran untuk memfasilitasi pembelian barang secara langsung atau tidak langsung, maka orang secara alami lebih memilih perolehan barang yang lebih dapat dipasarkan dan, pada batas, media pertukaran yang dapat dipasarkan secara universal dengan yang kurang atau nonuniversally marketable satu, seperti itu   Konteks | Permintaan Konteks

> [T]here would be an inevitable tendency for the less marketable of a series of goods used as media of exchange to be one by one rejected until at last only a single commodity remained, which was universally employed as a medium of exchange; in a word, money.[^45]

Selgin and White are familiar with this Mengerian-Misesian reconstruction of monetary evolution, of course. They apparently fail to recognize, however, that this feature of money as the most easily and widely salable commodity far from rendering it a future good, qualifies money at the same time as the good best suited to alleviate presently felt uncertainty and, as such, the most universally present good of all.[^46] Although only indirectly useful—in this regard like producer goods, and unlike any consumer good—money is precisely on account of its supreme saleability a uniquely present good—in this regard like consumer goods, and unlike any producer good. Because money can be employed for the instant removal of the widest range of possible needs (or the satisfaction of the widest range of possible desires), it provides its owner with the best humanly possible protection (insurance) against uncertainty; that is, against his uneasiness of *not* being able to predict—of *not* being certain about—all of his future needs and desires. In holding money, its owner gains in the satisfaction of being able instantly to meet, as they arise unpredictably, the widest possible range of future contingencies.

> The keeping of cash holding requires sacrifices. To the extent that a man keeps money in his pockets or in his balance with a bank, he forsakes the instantaneous acquisition of goods he could consume or employ for production.[^47]

Accordingly, to the extent that he feels certain regarding his future, a man will want to invest in consumer and producer goods. Only to the extent that he feels uncertain about his future will he want to make the sacrifice referred to by Mises; that is, will he possibly want to invest in relief from any uneasiness felt concerning the uncertainty of his future consumption—production (income—expenditure) pattern. Hence, rather than indicating his increased willingness to sacrifice present satisfaction in exchange for future satisfaction, an increased demand for money demonstrates a man’s more intensely felt uncertainty regarding his future; and rather than being an investment in the future, an addition to his cash balance represents an investment in present certainty (protection) vis-à-vis a future perceived as less certain.[^48]

In light of this praxeological reconstruction of money as a singularly present good, Selgin and White’s entire positive case for fractional reserve banking is revealed as mistaken. If banks indeed accommodate an (unanticipated) increased demand for money through the temporary issue of additional fiduciary media (credit), as Selgin and White propose, this can have only disruptive and disequilibrating effects. If and insofar as the accommodating response on the part of the banks is unanticipated, the interest rate will be reduced temporarily below its natural height, investment will increase, and the structure of production will be lengthened. Yet this result is fundamentally at odds with the public’s demonstrated preference. The public perceives the future as more (increasingly) uncertain and, accordingly, in striving to increase the size of its cash holdings and thereby bidding the prices of nonmoney goods down and correspondingly increasing the purchasing power per unit money, is intent upon providing for more (increased) present protection against uncertainty. To commit additional resources to the future is the expression of *less* public uncertainty (rather than more), and thus stands at cross-purpose to the public’s actual wishes and implies a systematic misallocation of resources (to be revealed in a boom-bust cycle). And in any case, even if the banks’ accommodating money supply increase could be fully anticipated and the structure of production were not unduly lengthened, any such accommodation would still be disruptive, because—even apart from its inescapable redistributionist consequences—it can only *delay* the arrival of the desired goal. In order to be better protected against perceived uncertainty, prices must fall and the purchasing power of money must rise. With an additional influx of money, it cannot but take *longer* before this goal is accomplished.[^49]

### A Final Note: Some Mistaken Analogies

In light of the fundamental distinction between property (money) and property titles (money substitutes) explained in earlier sections of this article and the foregoing elucidation of money as a uniquely present good, several analogies popularly employed in the attempted justification of fractional reserve banking can be finally disposed of as mistaken. Even if they correctly distinguish between property titles (tickets) and property, all proposed analogies—between fractional reserve banking on the one hand and airline overbooking, fractional reserve parking lots, lotteries, and insurance on the other hand—fail to recognize properly the fundamental distinction between present and future goods.

The owner of a title to money owns a present good (money property)—an indirectly yet immediately serviceable good. The fractional reserve banker is found guilty of fraud; he issued and sold additional titles to an unchanged quantity of money property. In distinct contrast; the owner of an airline ticket owns a future good. Hence, in overbooking *now* (today) a flight at a future date (tomorrow), an airline cannot possibly have committed fraud already now (today). Fraud cannot occur until tomorrow, when the tickets must be actually redeemed, and only if the airline is then unable to satisfy each and every ticket holder’s claim. In fact, airlines typically fulfill their contractual obligation: each ticket holder is assured a seat on the scheduled flight, because the airline is prepared to pay every excess ticket holder off, that is, to repurchase his ticket at a price (by exchange of another good) that the holder considers more valuable than his present airline seat. And certainly, no airline typically oversells spot-tickets (titles to seats right now, that is, present goods) and assigns two people to occupy the same seat, which is essentially what fractional reserve banking amounts to.

Similarly, the owner of a fractionally covered parking permit (with more permit holders than parking spaces) does not own a present good. He owns the right to participate for a specified period of time in repeated search for parking space. The owner of the parking facility cannot possibly commit any fraud in selling his permits, unless he then refused entry to a valid permit holder when there was empty space available, or if he changed the contractually agreed upon rules of the game; that is, if he had agreed to print up to a maximum of 200 permits, for instance, but actually printed 300\. It is only the owner of a spot parking ticket, or the owner of a reserved parking space, who are owners of a present good; and there is, of course, characteristically no overselling of spot spaces or of reserved parking.

The same reasoning applies to the case of lotteries. The holder of a lottery ticket does not own any present good. He owns the right to participate in the drawing of specified prizes, whereby it is self-understood among buyer and seller—as inherent in the nature of a lottery—that there are—and must be—more tickets than prizes. The lottery operator cannot possibly have committed any crime, unless he failed to redeem the winning tickets into the promised prizes or surreptitiously changed the preannounced rules of the game. If this is rarely the case, it is practically unheard of that a lottery would print more than one winning ticket for one and the same prize (present good), which would be likewise fraudulent, of course, and which is essentially what fractional reserve bankers do.

Finally, the proposed analogy between fractional reserve banking and insurance has already been refuted implicitly in note 46 above, concerning the relationship between risk and insurance on the one hand and uncertainty and money on the other. Unlike the owner of money, the owner of an insurance policy does not own a present but a future good. An insurance company may be unable to meet its contractually assumed obligations at some future pointin time, and one may then come to the conclusion that it had engaged in an overselling of tickets. However, it is impossible to say that a crime has been already committed now, at the moment when the insurance policy is sold, because the good sold by the insurance agency is a future one. In distinct contrast, the owner of a money ticket is the owner of a present good, and every overissue of tickets to present goods is from the very outset—instantly and immediately—fraudulent, and accordingly is contrary to market ethics.

[^39]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 102.

[^40]: Ibid., p. 103.

[^41]: Ibid., p. 102.

[^42]: Selgin and White’s view here is quite similar to that of Keynes (*The General Theory,* pp. 293–94), when he emphasized that “the importance of money essentially flows from its being a link between the present and the future,” and characterized money as “above all, a subtle device for linking the present and the future.”

[^43]: Put differently: rather than, as Selgin and White (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 102) say, that “the demand for cash stems from the convenience it allows one in purchasing … goods at uncertain *future* dates,” the demand for money stems from the convenience it allows one in purchasing goods at *uncertain* future dates.

[^44]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 249.

[^45]: Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 32–33.

[^46]: In fact, one can only wonder how Selgin and White could have possibly overlooked money’s character as a uniquely present good. After all, the interest rate as the most visible manifestation of the phenomenon of time preference is expressed in terms of *money*.

[^47]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 430\. The term uncertainty is employed here in its technical meaning as defined by Frank H. Knight (*Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit* [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971], esp. chap. 7) and Mises (*Human Action*, esp. chap. 6); that is, as categorically distinct from risk instances of class probability; also Hoppe (“On Certainty and Uncertainty, Or: How Rational Can Our Expectations Be?” *Review of Austrian Economics* 10, no. 1 [1979]: 49–78). Insofar as man faces a risky future, he does not need to hold cash. In order to satisfy his desire to be protected against risks, he can instead buy (or produce) insurance. A buyer of insurance demonstrates by his purchase that he is in fact *certain* about some future events. Hence, in paying a premium, he sacrifices a present good in exchange for a future one (payment in the event of actual risk-damage) and so contributes to and invests in a physical structure of production. Specifically, his premium becomes embodied in the production structure maintained by his insurance agency. In distinct contrast: insofar as man faces uncertainty he is, quite literally *not certain* concerning his future, that is, as to what will happen to him and when. Hence, in order to be protected against uncertainty, he cannot possibly invest in any future good. Only present goods can insure against instantly arising—unpredictable—events. Nor can he invest in (present) consumer goods (for this would mean that he actually felt certain as to the specific nature of his future contingencies). Only a medium of exchange, on account of its supreme saleability, can insure him against contingencies of an uncertain nature. Hence, just as insurance is the price that must be paid for protection against risks, so cash holdings are the price that must be paid for protection against uncertainty. See also the following final note below.

[^48]: Selgin and White never raise the question of *why* changes in the demand for money occur, and thus never penetrate to their ultimate—microeconomic—sources; that is, changes in individuals’ subjective evaluations of presently perceived personal uncertainty. In contrast, whereas they portray changes in the demand for money as seemingly unmotivated and inexplicable events, Mises is explicit and emphatic about the irrational character:

> The advantages and disadvantages derived from cash holding are not objective factors which could directly influence the size of cash holdings. They are put on the scales by each individual and weighed against one another. The result is a subjective judgment of value, colored by the individual’s personality. Different people and the same people at different times value the same objective facts in a different way. Just as knowledge of a man’s wealth and his physical condition does not tell us how much he would be prepared to spend for food of a certain nutritive power, so knowledge about data concerning a man’s material situation does not enable us to make definite assertions with regard to the size of his cash holding. (Mises, *Human Action*, p. 430)

[^49]: Mises summarizes:

> The services money renders are conditioned by the height of its purchasing power. Nobody wants to have in his cash holding a definite number of pieces of money or a definite weight of money; he wants to keep a cash holding of a definite amount of purchasing power. As the operation of the market tends to determine the final state of money’s purchasing power at a height at which the supply of and the demand for money coincide, there can never be an excess or a deficiency of money. Each individual and all individuals together always enjoy fully the advantages which they can desire from indirect exchange and the use of money, no matter whether the total quantity of money is great or small. Changes in money’s purchasing power generate changes in the disposition of wealth among the various members of society. From the point of view of people eager to be enriched by such changes, the supply of money may be called insufficient or excessive, and the appetite for such gains may result in policies designed to bring about cash-induced alterations in purchasing power. However, the services which money renders can be neither improved nor repaired by changing the supply of money. There may appear an excess or a deficiency of money in an individual’s cash holding. But such a condition can be remedied by increasing or decreasing consumption or investment. (Of course, one must not fall prey to the popular confusion between the demand for money for cash holding and the appetite for more wealth.) The quantity of money available in the whole economy is always sufficient to secure for everybody all that money does and can do. (Mises, *Human Action,* p. 421)