### Sekolah Ekonomi Austria dan Prospek Rasionalis Rekonstruksi Etika

Secara fakta bahwa positivisme dengan cepat dibantah sebagai sebuah sistem filsafat kontradiktif secara alami tentu saja tidak membantu. Namun, karena sifat doktrin positivis yang melayani diri sendiri bagi mereka yang berada dalam posisi kekuasaan pemerintah, hal itu juga tidak banyak mengurangi popularitas positivisme. Masih banyak yang dibutuhkan untuk mengalahkan positivisme daripada membuktikan secara logis salah: Butuh beberapa tahun eksperimen sosial, mencoba skala yang terus meningkat untuk membuktikan ke seluruh dunia dan dalam setiap negara bahwa yang tidak ada hukum etika dan ekonomi, bahwa tidak ada yang tabu, dan bahwa segala sesuatu mungkin terjadi. Dibutuhkan stagnasi ekonomi demokrasi kesejahteraan Barat yang dimulai pada akhir 60an dan awal 70an; pemiskinan abadi dari negara-negara Dunia Ketiga beberapa tahun setelah dekolonisasi mereka; dan secara bertahap, dan sejak akhir 80-an-setelah lebih dari 70 tahun percobaan-keruntuhan ekonomi yang sangat cepat dari negara-negara blok Timur Sosialis. [^24] Di luar dunia nyata, dalam dunia akademis, yaitu membutuhkan waktu sementara hilangnya etika dan teori politik, dan substitusi mereka dengan analisis linguistik, pembicaraan nonsen yang tidak berarti secara operasional, atau politik kelompok kepentingan dan teori tawar menawar. [25] Hal ini menuntut kemerosotan ekonomi menjadi latihan simbolik yang tidak berarti secara empiris, tidak ada kemiripan sama sekali dengan apa yang pernah menjadi subyek pemikiran klasik ekonomi (kecuali beberapa istilah yang kadang-kadang terdengar ekonomis [32], yang menghasilkan matematikawan tingkat dua terbaik tanpa penonton aktual, tapi hanya untuk mengumpulkan debu di pajak-perpustakaan yang didukung dalam dunia ini); atau diperlukan adanya ke industri peramalan ekonometrik yang perkasa, yang kesia-siaannya sangat jelas bagi semua orang, termasuk politisi dan birokrat pemerintah yang bersubsidi sehingga menggunakannya untuk tujuan "legitimasi ilmiah." [27] Hal ini memerlukan default dari sistem Keynesian, dengan munculnya fenomena stagflasi yang diduga tidak mungkin terjadi pada pertengahan 70an; rincian paradigma monetaris, setelah serangkaian prediksi yang benar-benar salah sejak akhir 70-an sampai tahun 80-an; dan kebangkrutan ekonomi Marxis yang lengkap dan menyeluruh di seluruh dunia. [28]

[^24]: Untuk interpretasi abad ke-20 sebagai puncak filsafat rekayasa sosial dan relativisme, lihatlah "Modern Times" Paul Johnson yang luar biasa (New York: Harper and Row, 1983).

[^25]: Lihat juga Veatch, *Rasional Manusia*; idem, *Untuk Ontologi Moral: Kritik terhadap Teori Etika Kontemporer* (Evanston, Ill .: Northwestern University Press, 1971); idem, *Hak asasi manusia: fakta atau kesenangan?* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985).

[^26]: Misalnya, Gary North menyarankannya

::::>lihatlah setiap halaman oleh pemenang hadiah Nobel ekonomi tahun 1983, Gerald Debreu, *Teori Nilai: Analisis Aksiomatik tentang Ekuilibrium Ekonomi*, yang dicetak kedelapan pada tahun 1979-sebuah kesaksian atas penghargaan studi pascasarjana di ekonomi. Satu-satunya petunjuk realitas di keseluruhan buku ini nampak pada hal. 29, kata-kata, "tidak. 2 Red Winter Wheat. "(Gary North," Mengapa Murray Rothbard Tidak Akan Memenangkan Hadiah Nobel!, "di Walter Block dan Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Manusia, Ekonomi, dan Kebebasan. Esai dalam Kehormatan of Murray N. Rothbard* [Auburn, Ala .: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988], hlm. 89-90)

[^27]: Pada degenerasi ilmu-ilmu sosial khususnya, lihatlah pengamatan brilian oleh Stanislav Andreski, *Ilmu Sosial sebagai Sihir* (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1972); Charles Sykes, *ProfScam: Profesor dan Demise Pendidikan Tinggi* (Washington, D.C .: Regnery, 1988).

[^28]: Lihat juga Murray N. Rothbard, *Untuk Kebebasan Baru* (New York: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 9; idem, "Invasi Hermeneutika untuk Filsafat dan Ekonomi," *Tinjauan Ekonomi Austria* 3 (1989): 54-55; idem, "Apakah Ada Kehidupan Setelah Reaganomik," di Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., ed., *Pembaca Pasar Bebas* (Auburn, Ala .: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988), esp. hal. 378; idem, "Ronald Reagan; Otopsi, "*Kebebasan* II, no.4 (Maret 1989).

Masih positivis adalah tidak mati. Namun, sejak pertengahan 70an harga relativisme sosial dan rekayasa selama puluhan tahun menjadi terlalu tinggi untuk diabaikan atau hanya dijelaskan. Secara bertahap, situasi krisis filosofis telah muncul. Tidak mengherankan, dengan positivisme akhirnya kehilangan varietas relativis yang lain, yang telah tenggelam selama masa jabatan positivis, telah muncul kembali dan mencoba untuk mengisi kekosongan ideologis yang melebar. Terkait dengan nama-nama seperti hermeneutika, retorika, ultra-subjektivisme, dan dekonstruksi, sebuah gerakan akademis mulai berlangsung yang mencoba menghidupkan kembali pesan lama tentang nihilisme-bahwa tidak ada yang namanya kebenaran-dan yang menganggap kegagalan positivisme bukan pada relativisme, tapi kenyataan bahwa itu tidak cukup relativistik untuk terus membiarkan kebenaran empiris dan kebenaran bukan kebenaran sama sekali. [29]

[^29]: Untuk evaluasi kritis tentang nihilisme baru, lihat Henry Veatch, "Dekonstruksi dalam Filsafat: Apakah Rorty menjadikannya sebagai Khalifah Filsafat Analitik Kontemporer ?," *Tinjauan Metafisika* 39 (1985); Jonathan Barnes, "Jenis Integritas," *Peninjauan Buku London* (6 November 1986); Rothbard, "Invasi Hermeneutika untuk Filsafat dan Ekonomi"; Hoppe, "dalam Pertahanan Rasionalisme Ekstrim."

Namun krisis tersebut juga telah membawa kembali filsafat rasionalisme sosial yang telah lama menunjukkan kepalsuan dari positivisme, tapi dilupakan selama puluhan tahun supremasi positivis. Dipicu oleh penghargaan Nobel pada tahun 1974 kepada Friedrich August von Hayek, akademisi ekonomi Austria yang lengkungan-rasional, dalam tradisi Carl Menger, Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk dan, di atas segalanya, Ludwig von Mises, guru Hayek, dan Murray N. Rothbard, telah mengalami kebangkitan yang menggembirakan. Dihapus selama beberapa tahun dari tingkat yang lebih tinggi dari akademisi bersubsidi karena implikasinya yang tidak enak bagi mereka yang berkuasa dan terdegradasi ke eksistensi yang tidak mengganggu di dunia bawah non-Universitas, intelektual dunia nyata, Sekolah Austria telah mendapatkan momentum dan tumbuh menjadi orang asli. gerakan massa, dengan peningkatan jumlah bastion akademis serta dukungan akar rumput yang terus membengkak. Sebenarnya, yang dipelopori oleh Ludwig von Mises Institute, yang didirikan pada pertengahan tahun 80-an, gerakan tersebut telah mengambil dimensi internasional dengan salah-Renaisans yang berkembang pesat di antara kalangan intelektual di negara-negara Eropa Timur. Dihadapkan dengan runtuhnya total sosialisme dan kelelahan semua wewenang dan legitimasi pemerintah, dan dihadapkan pada tugas rekonstruksi langsung dan radikal negara mereka, nasehat yang secara empiris tidak memiliki pengetahuan ekonomi matematis, atau ekonometrik, dapat memberi atau yang dapat diperoleh Dari Keynesianisme, Monetarisme, Ekspektasi Rasional atau, yang lebih buruk lagi, Hermeneutisme, hanya dapat menampakkan diri mereka sebagai hal yang sangat tidak masuk akal. Dalam situasi darurat mereka, hanya Sekolah Austria yang menawarkan jawaban yang tidak ambigu, radikal, dan konstruktif: Tidak hanya kebenaran ada dalam ilmu sosial, namun ada kebenaran apriori nonhypothetical dimana tidak ada yang mampu melepaskannya. Kebenarannya sesederhana mendasar: bahwa hak milik pribadi dan hak kepemilikan pribadi adalah prinsip etika dan prinsip mutlak yang tak terbantahkan, dan dasar untuk kemajuan ekonomi "optimal" yang terus berlanjut; dan bahwa untuk bangkit dari reruntuhan sosialisme, tidak ada yang cukup kecuali sebuah privatisasi tanpa kompromi dari setiap properti dan kembalinya ke masyarakat kontrak berdasarkan pengakuan akan absolutnya hak kepemilikan pribadi. [^30]

[^30]: Untuk penilaian kritis terhadap revolusi di Eropa Timur lihat Hans-Hermann Hoppe, "Runtuhnya Sosialisme dan Masa Depan Eropa Timur," *Kwasny Economics* II, no. 6 (30 Oktober 1989); idem, *Desosialisasi di Amerika Jerman* (Auburn, Ala .: Ludwig von Mises

Memang, Sekolah Austria mewakili yang paling ambisius dari semua bentuk rasionalisme sosial dengan anggapannya yang pantang menyerah bahwa pengetahuan empiris non apotekikal apotek di dalam bidang ilmu sosial ada, dan bahwa itu adalah etika dan ekonomi (yang mengandung pengetahuan ini) yang serupa untuk logika dan protofisika sebagai dasar mutlak dari semua penelitian sosial empiris. Lebih jauh lagi, Sekolah Austria sendiri telah membenarkan pertengkaran ini dengan menawarkan teori etika etika dan ekonomi yang sepenuhnya berkembang, konsisten, dan menyeluruh; [^ 31]

[^31]: Lihat secara khusus Mises, * Human Action *; Rothbard, * Manusia, Ekonomi, dan Negara *; idem, * Etika Kebebasan * (Dataran Tinggi Atlantik: Humaniora Press, 1982).

Secara tidak langsung, klaim dasar Austriaisme telah terbentuk. Selama sanggahan positivisme di atas ditunjukkan bahwa pengetahuan dan tindakan tidak dapat dianggap sebagai penyebab (yaitu, dapat diprediksi berdasarkan variabel efek waktu yang beroperasi secara tidak tetap), setiap tindakan, berdasarkan usaha untuk menghasilkan beberapa tujuan tertentu, mengandaikan suatu realitas fisik terstruktur. Jelas, wawasan ini sendiri merupakan contoh sempurna dari kemungkinan pengetahuan sosial yang tidak hipotetis: ini merumuskan pengetahuan tentang tindakan yang tidak mungkin ditemukan oleh aktor apa pun yang salah, karena penemuan semacam itu sebenarnya akan mengandaikan validitasnya.

The Austrian theory sets out from two systematically interrelated axioms, both of which are nonhypothetically true. The first is the “axiom of action”: the proposition that humans act, or more precisely, that I am acting now. It cannot be denied that this proposition is true, since the denial would itself be an action. Nor can anyone intentionally *not* act, because this, too, would be an action. Thus the truth of the axiom literally cannot be undone.[^32]

[^32]: See Mises, *Human Action*, part 1.

The second axiom is the “a priori of argumentation”. What we have done here all along—I in writing this study and the reader in reading it—is engaged in argumentation. If it were not for argumentation there would be no debate about the truth or falsity of social relativism or rationalism and the status of ethics and economics. There would only be silence or meaningless noise. Only with argumentation does the idea of validity and truth emerge. Whether or not something is true, false, or undecidable; whether or not it has been justified; what is required in order to justify it; whether I, someone else, or no one is right—all of this must be decided in the course of argumentation and propositional exchanges. This proposition is a priori true, too, because it cannot be denied without affirming it in the act of denying it. One cannot argue that one cannot argue, and one cannot dispute knowing what it means to raise a validity claim without implicitly claiming at least the negation of this proposition to be true. This is the *a priori of argumentation*,[^33] and both axioms are related as logically necessary interwoven strands of a priori knowledge. On the one hand, actions are more fundamental than argumentation because argumentation is only a subclass of action. On the other hand, to state what has just been stated about action and argumentation and their relationship to each other already requires argumentation, so epistemologically argumentation must be considered to be more fundamental than nonargumentative action.

[^33]: See in particular Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*, vol II.

Ethics, or more specifically, the Austrian private property ethic, is derived from the a priori of argumentation, and it is from its nature as a nonhypothetically true axiom that ethics derives its own status as absolutely true.[^34]

[^34]: See on the following Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*, chaps. 2, 7.

With the a priori of argumentation established as an axiomatic starting point of epistemology, it follows that anything that must be presupposed in the act of proposition-making cannot be propositionally disputed again. It would be meaningless to ask for a justification of presuppositions which make the production of meaningful propositions possible in the first place. Instead, they must be regarded as ultimately justified by every proposition maker. Any specific propositional content that disputed their validity must be understood as implying a performative or practical contradiction.

Further, in the same way as it is undeniably true that one cannot argue that one cannot argue, and that it must be assumed that everyone engaging in argumentation must know what it means to claim something to be true, it is also true that any argument requires an arguing person, an actor. Arguing never just consists of free-floating propositions but is always an activity, too. Given that truth claims must be raised and decided upon in the course of argumentation, and that argumentation, aside from whatever is said in its course is also a practical affair, it follows that intersubjectively meaningful norms must exist. These norms are precisely those which make an action argumentation, and they have a special cognitive status in that they are the practical preconditions of truth. In fact, neither the empiricalfact/emotive-value dichotomy so dear to the positivists, nor their distinction between empirical and analytical statements, could be claimed to be valid unless the norms underlying argumentation (in the course of which these distinctions are made) were themselves regarded as valid. It is simply impossible to argue otherwise because in doing so one would in fact presuppose their validity.

Now, as a necessarily practical affair, any propositional exchange requires a proposition-maker’s exclusive control (property) over some scarce means. No one could possibly propose anything, and no one could possibly become convinced of any proposition, if one’s right to make exclusive use of one’s physical body were not already presupposed. It is one’s recognition of another’s mutually exclusive control over his body which explains the distinctive characteristic of propositional exchanges: that while one may disagree about what has been said, it is still possible to agree at least on the fact that there is disagreement. It is obvious, too, that such a property right in one’s own body must be said to be justified a priori, for anyone who would try to justify any norm whatsoever must already presuppose an exclusive right of control over his body simply to say, “I propose such and such.” Anyone disputing such a right would become caught up in a practical contradiction, since in arguing so one would already implicitly have accepted the very norm that one was disputing.

Finally, it would be equally impossible to engage in argumentation, if one were not allowed to appropriate in addition to one’s body other scarce means through homesteading, i.e., by putting them to use before someone else does, or if such means were not defined in objective, physical terms.

For if no one had the right to control anything at all, except his own body, then we would all cease to exist and the problem of justifying norms—as well as all other human problems—simply would not exist. The fact that one is alive presupposes the validity of property rights to other things. No one who is alive could argue otherwise.

And if a person did not acquire the right of exclusive control over such goods by homesteading, by establishing some objective link between a particular person and a particular physical resource before anyone else had done so, but instead late-comers were assumed to have ownership claims to things, then literally *no one would be allowed to do anything with anything at any time* unless he had the prior consent of all late-comers. Neither we nor our forefathers nor our progeny could survive or will survive if we were to follow this rule. Yet in order for any person—past, present or future—to argue anything it must evidently be possible to survive. And in order for us to do this, property rights cannot be conceived of as timeless and nonspecific regarding the number of people concerned. Rather, property rights must necessarily originate through action at definite places and times for specific acting individuals. Otherwise, it would be impossible for anyone to say anything at a definite tine and place and for someone else to reply. To assert that the first-user-first-owner rule of private property can be ignored or is unjustified implies a contradiction. One’s assertion of this proposition presupposes one’s existence as a physically independent decision-making unit at a given point in time, and the validity of the homesteading principle as an absolute principle of property acquisition.

Economics, or in Mises’s terminology praxeology, and its status as a nonhypothetical, a priori true social science is derived from the axiom of action.[^35]

[^35]: See on the following Mises, *Human Action*, chap. IV; Rothbard, *Man Economy, and State*, chap. 1; idem, “Praxeology: The Methodology of Austrian Economics,” in Edwin Dolan, ed., *The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science*; also Lionel Robbins, *The Nature and Significance of Economic Science* (New York: New York University Press, 1982).

With every action an actor pursues a goal, and whatever his goal may be, the fact that it is pursued by an actor reveals that he places a relatively higher value on it than on any other goal of action he could conceive of at the start of his action.

In order to achieve this goal an actor must interfere or decide not to interfere (which is also an interference) at an earlier point in time to produce a later result, and this interference implies the use of some scarce means (at least those of the actor’s body, its standing room, and the time used by the interference).

These means must also have value for an actor—a value derived from that of the goal—because the actor must regard their employment as necessary in order to achieve the goal effectively. Further, actions can only be performed sequentially and always involve making a choice, i.e., taking up one course of action which at some given point in time promises the most highly valued result to the actor and excluding at the same time the pursuit of other, less valued goals.

In addition, when acting an actor not only invariably aims to substitute a more for a less satisfactory state of affairs and demonstrates a preference for higher over lower values; he also invariably considers when in the future his goals will be reached and demonstrates a universal preference for earlier over later results. Since every action requires time and man must occasionally consume something, time is always scarce. Hence, present or earlier results are, and invariably must be, valued more highly than future or later ones, and man will only exchange a present value against a future one if he thereby anticipates *increasing* his future well-being.

Furthermore, as a consequence of having to choose and give preference to one goal over another, of not being able to realize all goals simultaneously, and of being constrained by time preference, each and every action implies the incurrence of costs, i.e., the forsaking of the value attached to the most highly valued alternative goal that cannot be realized or whose realization must be postponed because the means necessary to effect it are bound up in the production of another, even more highly valued goal.

Finally, it is implied in our knowledge of what it is to act, that at its starting point every goal of action must be considered worth more to the actor than its cost and capable of yielding a profit, i.e., a result whose value is ranked higher than that of the foregone opportunities. However, every action is also invariably threatened by the possibility of a loss if in retrospect an actor finds that contrary to expectations the result actually achieved has a lower value than the relinquished alternative would have had.

All of these categories which we know to be the very heart of economics—values, means, choice, preference, time preference, cost, profit and loss—are implied in the axiom of action. Like the axiom itself, they incorporate nonhypothetically true knowledge. Any attempt to disprove this knowledge would itself have to be an action, aimed at a goal, requiring means, excluding other courses of action, incurring costs, subjecting the actor to the possibility of achieving or not achieving the desired goal, and thus leading to a profit or a loss.

All true economic propositions, and this is what the Austrian conception of economics is all about, can be deduced by means of formal logic from this incontestably true material knowledge regarding the meaning of action and its categories. More precisely, all true economic theorems consist of: (a) an understanding of the meaning of action; (b) a situation or situational change—assumed to be given or identified as being given—and described in terms of action-categories; and (c) a logical deduction of the consequences—again in terms of such categories—which result for an actor from this situation or situational change. For instance, the law of marginal utility, one of the most basic laws of economics, follows from our indisputable knowledge of the fact that every actor always prefers what satisfies him more over what satisfies him less, plus the assumption that he is faced with an increase in the supply of a good (a scarce means) whose units he regards as of equal serviceability by one additional unit. From this it follows with logical necessity that this additional unit can only be employed as a means for the removal of an uneasiness that is deemed less urgent than the least valuable goal previously satisfied by a unit of such a good.

The combination of ethics as implied in the axiom of argumentation and of economics as implied in that of action yields what might be called Austrian welfare economics.[^36]

[^36]: See also Murray N. Rothbard, *Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series no. 3, 1977); idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed, Andrews and McMeel, 1977); idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* 1, no. 2 (1981); Hoppe, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*; idem, “*Man, Economy, and Liberty*: Review Essay,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 4 (1990).

If and insofar as actors choose to act in accordance with the indisputably valid principle of the private property ethic, social welfare—defined in terms of Pareto-optimality—will invariably be optimized: A person’s original appropriation of unowned resources, as demonstrated by this very action, increases his utility or welfare (at least *ex ante*). At the same time, it makes no one worse off because in appropriating them he takes nothing away from others. Obviously, others could have homesteaded these resources, too, if only they had perceived them as scarce, and hence, valuable. However, they did not do so, which demonstrates that they attached no value to them whatsoever, and thus they cannot be said to have lost any utility on account of this act. Proceeding from this basis, any further act of production utilizing homesteaded resources is equally Pareto-optimal on demonstrated preference grounds, provided only that it does not uninvitedly impair the physical integrity of the resources homesteaded or produced with homesteaded means by others. Finally, every voluntary exchange starting from this basis must also be regarded as a Paretooptimal change because it can only take place if both parties expect to benefit from it.

Operating according to the rules just described always, and invariably so, leads to the greatest possible production of wealth, for any deviation from this set of rules implies, by definition, a redistribution of property titles, and hence of income, away from user-producers and contractors of goods onto non-users-producers and noncontractors. Consequently, any such deviation implies that there will be relatively less original appropriation of resources whose scarcity is recognized, there will be less production of new goods, less maintenance of existing goods, and less mutually beneficial contracting and trading. This in turn implies a lower standard of living in terms of exchangeable goods and services. Furthermore, the provision that only the *first* user of a good acquires ownership assures that productive efforts will be as high as possible *at all times*. The provision that only the physical integrity of property (not property values) is protected guarantees that every owner will undertake the greatest possible *value*-productive efforts to promote favorable changes in property values and to prevent or counter any unfavorable changes in property values (as they might result from another person’s actions regarding his property). Thus, any deviation from these rules also implies reduced levels of value productive efforts at all times.

The radical simplicity of this Austrian theory of ethics and economics, indeed the fact that it has been fully elaborated—foremost in Ludwig von Mises’s epochal *Human Action*, and in Murray N. Rothbard’s *Man, Economy, and State* and *The Ethics of Liberty*—to a rigorously consistent as well as architectonically beautiful edifice of ethical and economic thought explains why the social rationalism of the Austrian School could be driven underground during the heyday of positivism but could never be entirely uprooted and eradicated. Its truth is too obvious to be consistently ignored among men of intellectual curiosity and common sense, for is it not natural that every person should own his own body as well as all scarce goods which he puts to use with the help of this body before anyone else does? Is it not obvious that every owner should have the right to employ these goods as he sees fit so long as in so doing he does not uninvitedly change the physical integrity of another’s property? Is it not obvious that once a good has first been homesteaded or produced with homesteaded means, then ownership of it can only be acquired by means of a contractual, voluntary transfer of a property title from a previous to a later owner? And is it not intuitively clear that only if, and insofar as, these rules are in effect, the greatest possible production of social wealth and welfare will ensue?[^37]

[^37]: See on the idea of a natural sense of justice also Gustave de Molinari, *The Production of Security* (Burlingame, Calif.: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 2, 1977).

This so obviously true theory has the most radical practical-political implications. It refutes as ethically unjustifiable and economically counterproductive actions such as taxation, the legislative redistribution of private property rights, the creation of fiat money, fractional reserve banking, and ultimately, the very institution of state government. It demands instead a pure private property society, an anarchy of private property owners, regulated exclusively by private property law.[^38] By virtue of this, the Austrian School is brought into fundamental opposition to any exercise of governmental power. Recognizing it as their natural and most dangerous intellectual enemy, those in power have done everything possible to stamp out its memory and substitute statolatry for ethics and economics. As Mises writes:

[^38]: On this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*; idem, *Power and Market*, idem, *For A New Liberty*; idem, *The Ethics of Liberty*; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); idem, *A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism*.

> Despots and democratic majorities are drunk with power. They must reluctantly admit that they are subject to the laws of nature. But they reject the very notion of economic law. Are they not the supreme legislator? ...It is impossible to understand the history of economic thought if one does not pay attention to the fact that economics as such is a challenge to the conceit of those in power. An economist can never be a favorite of autocrats and demagogues. With them he is always the mischief-maker, and the more they are inwardly convinced that his objections are well founded, the more they hate him.[^39]

[^39]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 67.

In the present situation of a worldwide crisis of governmental legitimacy, of the collapse of East Bloc Socialism, and of the enduring stagnation of the Western Welfare States, the chance for Austrian rationalism to fill the philosophical vacuum that has appeared with the retreat of positivism and to become the paradigm of the future is as good or better than ever.[^40] Now as before it requires moral courage as much as intellectual integrity to propound the Austrian social theory—the opposing statist battalions still represent a formidable majority and are in control of a far larger share of resources. Nonetheless, with the total breakdown of socialism and the concept of social ownership staring everyone in the face, the antithetical Austrian theory of private property, free markets and laissez faire cannot but gain attractiveness and win support. Austrians have reason to believe that the time has come when they may succeed in bringing about a fundamental change in public opinion, by reclaiming ethics and economics from the hands of the positivists and the engineering powerful and by restoring public recognition of private property rights and free markets based on such rights as ultimate, absolute principles of ethics and economics.

[^40]: For a strategic assessment of the present age from an Austrian perspective see Murray N. Rothbard, “Left and Right: The Prospects for Liberty,” and “Ludwig von Mises and the Paradigm of Our Age,” in idem, *Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays* (Washington, D.C.: Libertarian Review Press, 1974).
