## Ilmu Ekonomi dan Sosiologi Perpajakan

Sebagaimana yang judul bab ini tunjukkan, saya telah menetapkan dua tujuan. Pertama, saya ingin menjelaskan efek ekonomi secara umum dari perpajakan. Bagian dari bab ini merupakan analisis praksiologis tentang perpajakan dan karena itu seharusnya tidak diharapkan untuk melangkah lebih jauh dari apa yang telah dikatakan oleh para ekonom lain.

Lebih murni mungkin bisa ditemukan di bagian kedua, di mana saya akan mencoba menjawab pertanyaan tentang mengapa ada perpajakan, dan mengapa selalu ada lebih dari itu? Menjawab pertanyaan semacam itu bukanlah tugas teori ekonomi, namun interpretasi sosiologis atau historis yang berdasarkan pengetahuan dan sejarah, dan sejak awal, lebih banyak ruang untuk adanya spekulasi di bidang penyelidikan intelektual ini.

## #

Mengatakan tidak ada yang baru untuk disebutkan mengenai efek ekonomi dari perpajakan adalah bukan untuk mengatakan bahwa apa yang *ada* tidak akan menjadi berita bagi banyak orang. Sebenarnya, setelah mensurvei beberapa buku teks ekonomi populer, sepertinya yang harus saya katakan merupakan berita bagi sebagian besar ekonom dan mahasiswa ekonomi saat ini. Sejauh buku-buku ini berhubungan dengan efek ekonomi dari perpajakan, di luar presentasi deskriptif murni tentang berbagai skema pajak dan perkembangan historis mereka, dan mereka hampir sepenuhnya terdiam mengenai pertanyaan tentang efek umum perpajakan. Terlebih lagi, apa yang dalam diskusi mereka mengenai masalah kejadian pajak yang kemudian disampaikan oleh buku-buku ini tentang efek ekonomi dari bentuk perpajakan tertentu selalu cacat.

Namun, keadaan ini hanya mencerminkan proses degenerasi intelektual. Sejak 150 tahun yang lalu, hampir semua hal yang harus dipahami saat ini tentang ekonomi perpajakan telah dikoreksi dengan benar dan diyakinkan oleh tokoh terkemuka dalam sejarah ekonomi seperti Jean Baptiste Say katakan dalam bukunya *Treatise on Political Economy*.

Berbeda dengan para penulis buku pelajaran hari ini, yang menetapkan pembahasan perpajakan ke tempat-tempat yang sewenang-wenang di dalam arsitektonik buku-buku mereka, dari awal Say dengan benar menempatkan fenomena di bawah judul umum "Konsumsi Kekayaan".

Dia kemudian secara tidak jelas mengidentifikasi dan menjelaskan perpajakan sebagai serangan dan hukuman atas perolehan dan produksi kekayaan, yang tentunya menyebabkan pengurangan pembentukan kekayaan yang terkandung dalam kekayaan semacam itu dan penurunan standar kehidupan umum.

Say menuliskan:

> Ini adalah kemustahilan yang mencolok untuk dipuji, dimana perpajakan menyumbang kekayaan nasional, dengan mengerahkan bagian dari produksi nasional, dan memperkaya bangsa dengan mengkonsumsi sebagian dari kekayaannya.[^2]
> 
> Perpajakan adalah pengalihan sebagian produk nasional dari tangan individu ke pemerintah untuk kepentingan memenuhi konsumsi publik atau pengeluaran. Apa pun yang menjadi nama yang dikenakannya, apakah pajak, kontribusi, kewajiban, cukai, adat, bantuan, subsidi, hibah, atau pemberian gratis, ini sebenarnya adalah beban yang dikenakan pada setiap individu, baik secara terpisah atau perusahaan, oleh penguasa yang berkuasa saat ini, untuk tujuan memasok konsumsi, dan menurut perkiraan mereka, serta tepat untuk menghasilkan biaya; Singkatnya, pajak, dalam arti harfiah.[^3]

Karena wawasan mendasar seperti itu tampaknya telah dilupakan, atau setidaknya tidak lagi tampak jelas hari ini, biarkan saya, sebagai tugas pertama saya untuk menyajikan sebuah laporan praksiologis baru dan penjelasan untuk argumen utama Say dan validitasnya, dan selanjutnya demikian membantah beberapa "argumen yang melawan" yang mengaku menunjukkan bahwa perpajakan tidak perlu menghalangi pembentukan harta dan kekayaan. Mengingat penjelasan umum ini, saya kemudian akan menunjukkan kesalahan logis mendasar dalam standar analisis buku tentang kejadian pajak.

Perpajakan itu terutama dan yang terpenting dan harus dipahami sebagai sarana penghancuran formasi harta dan kekayaan mengikuti analisis logis sederhana tentang makna perpajakan.

Perpajakan adalah pemaksaan, pengalihan aset fisik secara tidak kontraktual (kebanyakan saat ini, tapi tidak semata-mata uang), dan nilai yang terkandung di dalamnya, dari seseorang atau sekelompok orang yang pertama kali memegang aset ini dan yang dapat memperoleh penghasilan dari pemilikan lebih lanjut, untuk yang lain, yang sekarang memilikinya dan sekarang memperoleh penghasilan dari pekerjaan itu. Bagaimana aset-aset ini berada di tangan pemilik aslinya? Mengesampingkan bahwa ini merupakan hasil dari tindakan perpajakan sebelumnya, dan mencatat bahwa hanya aset tersebut yang dapat dikenai pajak yang belum dikonsumsi atau yang nilainya belum habis melalui tindakan konsumsi (pengumpul pajak tidak mengambilnya sampah orang lain melainkan asetnya yang masih berharga!), ada tiga dan hanya tiga kemungkinan: Mereka masuk ke dalam kepemilikan seseorang baik oleh seseorang yang telah mengetahui sifat tertentu karena barang-barang langka dan secara aktif membawa mereka ke dalam kepemilikan seseorang sebelum orang lain melihat dan memilikinya; dengan memproduksinya dengan cara kerja seseorang dari barang-barang yang sebelumnya telah disesuaikan; atau melalui kepemilikian sukarela dan kontrak dari apropriator atau produser sebelumnya. Hanya melalui jenis kegiatan ini seseorang dapat memperoleh dan meningkatkan aset berharga dan makanya aset-asetnya dikenai pajak. Tindakan peruntukan asli mengubah sesuatu yang sebelumnya tidak pernah dianggap sebagai sumber pendapatan menjadi pendapatan yang menghasilkan pendapatan, yakni tindakan produksi berdasarkan sifatnya yang ditujukan pada transformasi aset yang kurang berharga menjadi barang yang lebih berharga, dan setiap pertukaran kontrak menyangkut perubahan dan pengalihan aset spesifik dari tangan orang-orang yang lebih sedikit menghargai kepemilikan mereka kepada orang-orang yang lebih banyak menghargai kepemilikan mereka.

Dari sini, mengikuti setiap bentuk perpajakan yang menyiratkan pengurangan pendapatan yang dapat diharapkan seseorang untuk diterima dari penggunaan awal, mulai dari produksi, atau dari kontrak. Karena kegiatan ini membutuhkan ketiadaan sarana yang langka, setidaknya waktu dan penggunaan tubuh seseorang yang dapat digunakan untuk konsumsi dan/atau rekreasi, biaya kesempatan untuk melakukan hal tersebut dinaikkan. Utilitas kecil dari penggunaan, produksi, dan kontrak menurun, dan utilitas konsumsi dan kenyamanan yang kecil meningkat. Dengan demikian, akan ada kecenderungan untuk beralih dari peran sebelumnya dan menjadi yang terakhir.[^4]

Oleh karena itu, dengan mentransfer secara paksa aset berharga dan belum dikonsumsi dari produsen mereka (dalam pengertian yang lebih luas mengenai istilah termasuk apropriator dan kontraktor) kepada orang-orang yang belum memproduksinya, perpajakan mengurangi pendapatan produsen saat ini dan mungkin tingkat konsumsi mereka saat ini. Selain itu, mengurangi insentif saat ini untuk menghasilkan aset berharga di masa depan dan dengan demikian juga menurunkan pendapatan masa depan dan tingkat konsumsi yang ada di masa depan. Perpajakan bukan hanya sebuah hukuman konsumsi tanpa mempengaruhi usaha produktif. Ini juga merupakan serangan terhadap produksi sebagai satu-satunya cara untuk menyediakan dan mungkin meningkatkan pendapatan masa depan dan pengeluaran konsumsi. Dengan menurunkan nilai saat ini yang terkait dengan usaha yang berorientasi pada masa depan dan bernilai produktif, perpajakan meningkatkan tingkat preferensi waktu yang efektif, yaitu tingkat bunga dasar dan, karenanya, mengarah kepada pada penyingkatan periode produksi dan penyediaan dan memberi pengaruh yang tak terhindarkan untuk mendorong umat manusia ke arah eksistensi yang hidup dari tangan ke mulut. Cukup meningkatkan pajak secukupnya, dan anda akan menemukan umat manusia berada pada level binatang buas binatang.

Straightforward as such reasoning may seem, there are a number of popular objections raised against it. For instance, from the side of economists who falsely conceive of economics as an empirical science that produces nothing but hypothetical explanations which invariably must be tested against empirical evidence in order to be validated (analogous to the situation in the natural sciences), the following argument is frequently heard: Empirically, it has been observed repeatedly that a rise in the level of taxation was actually accompanied by a rise (not a fall) in GNP or other measures of productive output; hence, the above reasoning, however plausible, must be considered empirically invalid. In fact, some empiricists of this sort go even further and make the stronger claim that taxation actually helps increase the standard of living as evidenced by the fact that some countries with once low standards of living and low levels of taxation now enjoy a much greater wealth with much higher taxes.

Both objections are simply confused. Experience cannot beat logic, and interpretations of observational evidence which are not in line with the laws of logical reasoning are no refutation of these but the sign of a muddled mind (or would one accept someone’s observational report that he had seen a bird that was red and non-red all over at the same time as a refutation of the law of contradiction rather than the pronouncement of an idiot?).

As regards the stronger thesis, it is nothing but a beautiful illustration of the ever so attractive *post hoc ergo propter hoc* fallacy. From the fact that the correlated events of high taxation and wealth were to be observed later than those of low taxation and wealth it is inferred that increased taxation increases wealth. Yet to reason in this way is about as convincing as the argument—justly ridiculed by Say—that one can observe rich men consuming more than poor ones; therefore, their high level of consumption must be responsible for the fact that they are rich.[^5] Just as it follows from the meaning of consumption that this is impossible and that, on the contrary, the rich are not rich because of their high level of consumption but because they previously abstained from consumption and engaged instead in value-productive actions, so it follows from the meaning of taxation that mankind cannot have prospered because of higher levels of taxation but despite such a fact.

The weaker thesis—that experience would at least disprove any claim of a relationship between taxation and productive output that was negative by necessity—is also off the mark. The praxeological reasoning presented above does not at all rule out what empiricist economists falsely interpret as a refutation. In this earlier discussion the conclusion had been reached that the effect of taxation is a relative reduction in the production of valuable assets—a reduction, that is, as compared with the level of output that would have been produced had there been no taxation at all or had the level of taxation not been raised. Nothing was said or implied with respect to the absolute level of the output of valuable assets. As a matter of fact, absolute growth of GNP, for instance, is not only compatible with our earlier praxeological analysis, but can even be seen as a perfectly normal phenomenon to the extent that advances in productivity are possible and actually take place. If it has become possible through improvements in the technology of production to produce a higher output with an identical input (in terms of cost), or a physically identical output with a reduced input, then the coincidence of increased taxation and an increased output of valuable assets is anything but surprising. However, this does not in the least affect the validity of what has been stated about relative impoverishment resulting from taxation. With a given state of technological knowledge, though it may change over time, and taxation being what it is (a punishment of value-productive efforts), the level of productive output must be lower than the one that could have been attained with the same knowledge and no or lower taxation. Statistical studies here are entirely beside the point: they can neither help strengthen it, nor can they ever be used to weaken it.

Another theoretical objection which enjoys some popularity is that imposing or raising taxes leads to a reduction of income derived from the assets taxed; that this reduction raises the marginal utility of such assets as compared to what can be derived from other forms of activity; and thus, instead of lowering it, taxation actually helps increase the tendency to engage in production. For the usual case of taxing money assets this is to say that taxes reduce monetary income which raises the marginal utility of money, and this in turn increases the incentive to attain monetary returns. This argument, to be sure, is perfectly true as far as it goes. However, it is a misconception to believe that it does anything to invalidate the relative impoverishment thesis that I have advanced. First of all, in order to keep the record straight it should be noted that even if it were true—as the just presented argument seems to suggest, albeit falsely as we will see—that increased taxation does not lead to a relatively lower output of valuable assets produced since it spurs a proportional increase in workaholism, it is still the case that the income of value-productive individuals has fallen. Even if they produce the same output as previously, they can only do so if they expend more labor now than before. Since any additional labor expenditure implies forgone leisure or consumption (leisure or consumption which they otherwise could have enjoyed along with the same output of valuable assets), their overall standard of living must be lower.[^6]

It now becomes apparent why the assumption that taxation can leave the productive output of valuable assets unaffected and exclusively cripple consumption is fatally flawed. If taxation reduces one’s income (which includes that derived from present consumption and leisure), and given the universal fact of time preference, that is, that human actors invariably prefer present goods over future goods (that they cannot do without continuous consumption and can engage in lengthier, more roundabout methods of production only if a provision in the form of consumption goods has been made for the corresponding waiting period), then it necessarily follows that a person’s effective rate of time preference must have been raised through this very act (the disutility of waiting must have increased), and that he will have to shorten the length of the structure of production as compared to the one that he otherwise would have chosen. Accordingly, his output of valuable assets available at future dates will have to be lower than would be the case otherwise. If with lower or no taxation his income had been higher and his time preference schedule being given (whatever it happens to be at any particular point in time), he would have invested in lengthier production processes. As a consequence, his output of valuable future assets would have been relatively greater.[^7]

The error in the thesis that taxation can have a neutral effect on production lies in the fact that time preference is not taken into account. The argument presently under scrutiny is quite correct in pointing out that taxation implies a twofold signal: on the one hand the substitution effect working in favor of consumption and leisure and against work; and on the other hand the income effect of raising the marginal utility of the taxed asset. However, it is false to interpret this simplistically as a mixed bag of contradictory signals—one in favor of and one against work—so that one can then state nothing of a categorical nature regarding the effects of taxation on production, and the question of whether or not taxation provides for a lower or a higher output of valuable assets must be conceived of as an entirely empirical one.[^8] For in fact, the signal of taxation is not contradictory at all once it has been recognized that it is being sent to persons whose actions are invariably constrained by time preference. For such actors there exists not only the alternative between work and no work at all but also one between producing a valuable asset in more or less time-consuming ways. Invariably, they must also choose between obtaining an asset quickly and directly, with little waiting time involved, but at the price of having to resort to less efficient methods of production (the famous fisherman who decides to use his bare hands to catch fish in order to obtain it more quickly than by going through more roundabout methods of production), or obtaining it through more productive methods but then having to wait longer for them to bear fruit (the fisherman who, lured by higher future returns, decides to endure a longer waiting period and first builds a net). However, given these choices, the message of taxation is completely unambiguous and unequivocal, and there can no longer be any question that the substitution effect must be thought of as systematically dominating any income effect: If there is not only the option of having something or not having it but also of having less of something sooner or more of it later, the double message sent through taxation is easily integrated and translated into one: reduce the waiting time; shorten the roundabout methods of production! By doing so, valuable assets will be obtained earlier—in line with their increased marginal utility. Simultaneously, in shortening the waiting period, more room will be given for leisure—in line with its increased marginal utility. By reducing the length of roundabout methods of production the two seemingly contradictory signals stemming from taxation are simultaneously accounted for. Contrary to any claim of a systematically “neutral” effect of taxation on production, the consequence of any such shortening of roundabout methods of production is a lower output produced. The price that invariably must be paid for taxation, and for every increase in taxation, is a coercively lowered productivity that in turn reduces the standard of living in terms of valuable assets provided for future consumption. Every act of taxation necessarily exerts a push away from more highly capitalized, more productive production processes in the direction of a hand-to-mouth-existence.

[^1]: Exclusively descriptive analyses of taxation are given, for instance, by Paul Samuelson, *Economics*, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), chap. 9; Roger L. Miller, *Economics Today*, 6th ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), chap. 6.

[^2]: Jean Baptiste Say, *A Treatise on Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1964), pp. 446–47.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 446; on Say’s economic analysis of taxation see also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (Fall, 1981), esp. pp. 551–54.

[^4]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), chap. 12.8; idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 4, 1–3.

[^5]: See Say, A Treatise on Political Economy, p. 448.

[^6]: See on this point also Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 95f.

[^7]: One might object here that the tax receipts will come into someone’s hands—those of government officials or of governmental transfer-paymentrecipients—and that their increased income, resulting in a lower effective time preference rate for them, may offset the increase in this rate on the taxpayers’ side and hence leave the overall rate and the structure of production unchanged. Such reasoning, however, is categorically flawed: For one thing, insofar as government expenditure is concerned, it cannot be regarded as investment at all. Rather, it is consumption, and consumption alone. For, as Rothbard has explained,

::::> [i]n any sort of division-of-labor economy, capital goods are built, not for their own sake by the investor, but in order to use them to produce lower-order and eventually consumers’ goods. In short, a characteristic of an investment expenditure is that the good in question is not being used to fulfill the needs of the investor, but of someone else—the consumer. Yet, when government confiscates resources from the private market economy, it is precisely defying the wishes of the consumers; when government invests in any good, it does so to serve the whims of government officials, not the desires of consumers. (*Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 816–17)

::::Thus, government expenditure, by definition, cannot be conceived of as lengthening the production structure and hence as counterbalancing the taxpayers’ raised time preference rate.—On the other hand,

::::> as for the *transfer* expenditures made by the government (including the salaries of bureaucrats and subsidies to privileged groups), it is true that some of this will be saved and invested. These investments, however, will not represent the voluntary desires of consumers, but rather investments in fields of production *not* desired by the *producing* consumers…. Once let the tax be eliminated, and … the new investments called forth by the demands of the specially privileged will turn out to be *malinvestments*. (*Power and Market*, p. 98)

::::Consequently, transfer expenditures also cannot be conceived of as compensating for the fact that taxpayers shorten the length of the production structure. All such expenditures can do is to lengthen the structure of mal-production. “At any rate” concludes Rothbard,

::::> the amount consumed by the government insures that the effect of income taxation will be to raise time-preference ratios and to reduce saving and investment. (Ibid., p. 98)

[^8]: See for such—irrelevant—empirical studies regarding the relative importance of income vs. substitution effects George F. Break, “The Incidence and Economic Effects of Taxation,” in *The Economics of Public Finance* (Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1974), pp. 180ff.; A.B. Atkinson and Joseph E. Stiglitz, *Lectures on Public Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1980), pp. 48ff.; Stiglitz, *Economics of the Public Sector* (New York: Norton, 1986), p. 372.
