## Apakah Penelitian Berdasarkan Prinsip Ilmiah Kausal Layak dalam Ilmu Sosial?

###

Penggunaan teknik-tehnik matematika dan statistik menjadi semakin meluas dalam ilmu sosial.Oleh karena itu, Ini semakin penting untuk membuktikan dengan penjelasan yang terperinci tentang teknik-teknik ini sehingga ada alasan-alasan untuk meragukan penerapannya di bidang ilmu sosial.

Tujuan dari tulisan ini adalah untuk menawarkan penjelasan semacam itu dengan referensi yang spesifik pada teknik yang memungkinkan kita untuk mengambil seperangkat data tertentu dan menentukan nilai konstanta dengan cara sebuah variabel yang ditafsirkan sebagai variabel terikat dapat dibawa menjadi hubungan yang diatur oleh hukum dengan variabel lain. Ini tidak relevan apakah hubungan ini linier atau tidak linier, apakah ada satu atau lebih dari satu variabel bebas, apakah - seperti dalam analisis deret waktu yang mana variabel dependen sendiri juga berfungsi (pergeseran waktu) sebagai variabel bebas, dan apakah hubungan bersifat rekursif atau tidak rekursif, deterministik atau statistik. Kritik tersebut berlaku untuk semua teknik, mulai dari regresi linier sederhana hingga prosedur analisis time series yang kompleks, selama teknik tersebut digunakan untuk menentukan nilai konstanta (termasuk yang memiliki nilai yang bervariasi sesuai dengan beberapa pola yang konsisten). Perlu menunjukkan bahwa penggunaan teknik semacam itu meningkat di bidang ekonomi, dan ekonometrik yang terus membangun posisinya sebagai rumah teknik-teknik ini, [^1] meskipun terdapat kritikan dari para pendukung ekonomi murni. [^2] Dalam sosiologi juga, pengenalan sistematis teknik ekonometrik sedang terlihat. semakin menjadi obat mujarab yang universal, dan sebuah tren yang dipupuk terutama oleh karya-karya Blalock. [^3]

[^1]: Baca karangan Mordecai Ezekiel dan Karl Fox, *Methods of Correlation and Regression Analysis* (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1966); P. Rao and R.L. Miller, *Applied Econometrics* (Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1971); Robert Pindyck dan Daniel Rubinfeld, *Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts* (New York: McGraw-Hill 1976).

[^2]: Baca karangan Lionel Robbins, *The Nature and Significance of Economic Science* (London: Macmillan, 1935); Ludwig von Mises, *Theory and History* (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1957); idem, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1978); idem, *Human Action: A Treatise on Economics* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966).

[^3]: Hubert Blalock, *Causal Inferences in Non-Experimental Research* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1964); idem, *Theory Construction* (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1969); N. Krishnan Namboodiri, F. Carter, dan Hubert Blalock, *Applied Multivariate Analysis and Experimental Designs* (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975); baca juga karangan David Heise, *Causal Analysis* (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975).

###

Untuk menggambarkan argumen berikut, mari kita asumsikan bahwa nilai konstanta ::b_1:: and ::b_2:: dalam persamaan regresi berganda

::Y = a + b_1 X_1 + b_2 X_2 + e:: 

yang telah ditentukan berdasarkan seperangkat data tertentu. ::Y::—Variabel dependen diinterpretasikan sebagai sebuah fungsi linear dari variabel bebas ::X_1:: and ::X_2:: dan besarnya kesalahan e dengan nilai rata-rata dari ::0::.

::b::-kesatuan yang konstan dalam persamaan ini dapat diinterpretasikan dengan dua cara. Mereka bisa diinterpretasikan yang tidak berbahaya, tapi sama sekali bukan interpretasi yang biasa, atau mereka diberikan interpretasi yang normal. Penafsiran kedua ini, bagaimanapun, tidak lagi tidak berbahaya. Ini melibatkan asumsi yang, seperti yang akan ditunjukkan dan tidak sesuai dalam ilmu sosial.

Berdasarkan penafsiran pertama yang tidak berbahaya, koefisien regresi parsial mewakili tidak lebih dari sebuah pernyataan yang dapat diverifikasi tentang bagaimana cara terbaik untuk memprediksi nilai ::Y:: berdasarkan ::X_1::dan::X_2::nilai-nilai ::X_1:: dan ::X_2:: nilai (dengan asumsi kedua linieritas dan yang satunya berhubungan dengan efek aditif). Kesatuan konstanta adalah fakta historico-mathematical. Mereka tidak memiliki signifikansi melebihi data historis sehubungan dengan apa nilai-nilai mereka ditentukan.

Tidak ada keberatan terhadap penafsiran ini. Namun, konsekuensinya, bahwa membuat persamaan dari jenis yang diberikan di atas diturunkan secara signifikan. Seseorang tidak akan membangun sebuah prinsip teoritis namun hanya memberikan deskripsi fakta, dan terlebih lagi, deskripsi tentang jenis yang dapat dihasilkan sesuka hati untuk sekumpulan data hanya dengan memvariasikan asumsi seseorang tentang jenis-jenis fungsi dan denga meminta bantuan komputer.

Tidak mungkin ada orang yang pernah melakukan analisis regresi yang bermaksud mencapai apa yang tersirat dari penafsiran yang tidak berbahaya ini. Tindakan pembentukan persamaan di atas biasanya ditafsirkan sebagai rumusan hipotesis umum yang dapat dipalsukan oleh data baru yang menegaskan bahwa hubungan diantaranya ::Y::, ::X_1:: dan ::X_2::, yang ditentukan oleh kesatuan konstanta dalam persamaan yang berlaku secara universal.

###

Asumsi-asumsi implisit yang diminta oleh interpretasi ini dapat direkonstruksi dengan mempertimbangkan situasi berikut. Dengan menggunakan data baru, sebuah usaha telah dilakukan untuk mereproduksi hasil yang diperoleh dengan analisis dari rangkaian awal data dan diformalkan dalam persamaan di atas dengan menggunakan konstanta dengan nilai yang ditentukan secara tepat. Mari kita asumsikan bahwa hasil dari usaha ini merupakan analisis regresi linier berganda dilakukan untuk kedua ::Y:: dan ::X_1:: dan ::X_2:: Variabel-variabel dari kumpulan data kedua ini menghasilkan ::b:: konstanta yang berbeda secara signifikan dari data yang diperoleh untuk kumpulan data pertama. Menurut penafsiran yang tidak berbahaya dari persamaan tersebut, hasil ini tidak akan memiliki konsekuensi tertentu. Dengan kumpulan data pertama, seseorang telah membentuk fakta historico-mathematical tertentu, dan dengan fakta kedua lainnya. Keduanya berbeda, dan hanya itu yang ada. Menurut penafsiran normal, bagaimanapun, kegagalan untuk mereproduksi hasil memalsukan hipotesis.

Prasyarat untuk bisa mengatakan "memalsukan" adalah "prinsip konsistensi", yang meyakini bahwa fenomena yang dapat diamati pada prinsipnya ditentukan oleh sebab-sebab yang konstan dan merupakan pembalikan waktu dalam cara mereka beroperasi, dan pada prinsipnya, permainan kontinjensi tidak ada bagian dalam cara yang menjadi penyebabnya beroperasi. Hanya jika prinsip keteguhan diasumsikan valid, hal itu mengikuti dari kegagalan untuk mereproduksi hasil bahwa ada sesuatu yang salah dengan hipotesis aslinya.

Secara jelas, prinsip konsistensi tidak hanya didasarkan pada pengalaman. Seperti yang telah diketahui setelah Hume, tidak ada hubungan yang dapat diamati yang menghubungkan kejadian, dan bahkan jika ada kaitan seperti itu, maka pengalaman tidak dapat menunjukkan apakah itu waktu yang invarian atau tidakSecar jelas, prinsip konsistensi tidak hanya didasarkan pada pengalaman. Seperti yang telah diketahui setelah Hume, tidak ada hubungan yang dapat diamati yang menghubungkan kejadian, dan bahkan jika ada kaitan seperti itu, pengalaman tidak dapat menunjukkan apakah itu waktu invarian atau tidak..... The principle cannot be disproved by experience either, for once it is accepted, any event which appears to disprove it (such as a failure to duplicate a result) can be interpreted from the outset as if experience shows here merely that one *particular* variable is not the cause of another variable requiring explanation (otherwise the result would have been successfully duplicated). No conclusion can be drawn as to whether any *other* variable might actually be found which turns out to be time-invariant in the way it operates with respect to the dependent variable in which we are interested. To the extent that experience cannot exclude this possibility, the validity of the constancy principle cannot be disproved.

Although neither derived from nor disprovable by experience, the constancy principle is nevertheless a necessary condition for there being experiences which can be regarded as either confirming or falsifying each other (in contrast to the isolated and unconnected experiences connected with historical facts).[^4] The failure to duplicate results could be interpreted as falsifying the original hypothesis in accordance with the normal interpretation of the regression equation, and one might consequently feel prompted to explain the differing values of the ::b:: constants by asserting that in *one* sample one or more factors ::F:: were implicitly involved in causing ::Y:: which were not present in the *other* sample or did not operate in the same way. Finally, one might feel the need to explain these factors ::F:: hypothetically and to incorporate them in the initial hypothesis which assumed only the systematic operation of ::X_1:: and ::X_2::, thus replacing one hypothesis by a new one. But all this is only possible to the extent that one has already assumed the validity of the constancy principle for ::Y:: and all the factors causing ::Y::.

[^4]: See on this point, for example, Friedrich Kambartel, *Erfahrung and Struktur* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968), chap. 3, in particular pp. 91ff.; also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Handeln und Erkennen* (Bern: Lang, 1976), pp. 85ff., and chap. 4.

###

We have asserted that there is a sphere of objective reality which cannot be regarded as determined by laws, and that, therefore, no equation describing its behavior (such as the regression equation given above) can be formulated which can be given a normal interpretation.

Since the validity of the constancy principle cannot be doubted on the evidence of external, sensory experience, it can only be on logical grounds that the principle can correctly be regarded as inapplicable in any particular sphere.

The constancy principle is an operational schema, a method. One does not experience and learn that there are causes which always operate in the same way, rather one establishes that phenomena have particular causes by following a particular type of investigative procedure, by refusing on principle to allow any exceptions (instances of inconstancy), and by being prepared to deal with them by producing a new hypothesis each time one is required. The world by itself is not sufficient to establish the constancy principle. It requires the existence of an active, perceiving subject. For his part, this active subject—the prerequisite for a world determined by causes having constant effects—cannot, for logical reasons, assume the validity of the constancy principle with respect to the states of his knowledge (and to the intentional actions which might draw on that knowledge). In order to guarantee the unconditional validity of the constancy principle, the subject must himself be able to learn. He must start from the assumption that he can assimilate falsifying experiences and replace old hypotheses with new ones. If on the other hand one were to view the state of one’s knowledge as caused, and if (absurdly) one were to treat anything not yet known as being predictable in principle, one would deprive oneself of all possibility of using one’s ability to learn, that is, to form new, previously unknown hypotheses, as a way of maintaining the law-governed nature of that sphere of reality, which is *not* constituted by knowledge or actions drawing on that knowledge.

The result of this logical analysis of the constancy principle as the principle of a nonempirically based operational schema underlying causal investigation is that the principle can only be valid in that objective sphere which is *not* constituted by one’s own knowledge or actions manifesting that knowledge. (In this sphere, the question of whether there are law-governed constants on the basis of which it becomes possible to make *ex ante* predictions is positively determined independently of experience, and empirical factors play a role only in the question of which concrete variables are causally linked to which concrete effect variables and which are not.) In the sphere of knowledge and action, on the other hand, it cannot be valid. (In this sphere, the question of whether or not there are constants is itself empirical in nature and can only be decided for a given variable on the basis of past experience, that is decided *ex post*.)

###

For anyone who is capable of learning, his or her knowledge and actions cannot logically be regarded as determined by a complex of causes operating in a constant way (whether statistically or deterministically). There can only be constants in relation to the causes of events where one is dealing with a world of nonlearning objects, or more correctly, where one conceives of an objective sphere of reality as a world of nonlearning objects. One cannot, however, think of oneself as nonlearning. Not only is an intellect functioning in accordance with the constancy principle necessarily a learning intellect (we learn about how objects conceived of as non-learning behave), but the statement “I can learn” also proves to hold true in other respects. It is in principle not falsifiable, for in order to falsify it one would need to be able to learn. And from another point of view, one cannot justifiably argue against the statement since, qua argument, there must be possible replies to it, and as the validity of an argument (as opposed to that of a stimulus) would be independent of the nature of the reply, such possible replies must be regarded as *contingent* reactions, and therefore it must be possible to learn.

No scientific advance can ever alter the fact that one must regard one’s knowledge and actions as uncaused. One might hold this conception of “freedom” to be an illusion, and from the point of view of a “scientist” with cognitive powers substantially superior to any human, that is, from the point of view of God, such a description may well be correct. However, we are not God, and even if freedom is illusory from His standpoint, for us human beings it is a necessary illusion.[^5] We cannot predict in advance the future states of our knowledge and the actions manifesting that knowledge on the basis of previous states; we can only reconstruct them after the event.[^6]

[^5]: The same illusion would also arise in relation to God, if one assumed that He too could learn.

[^6]: Karl R. Popper, *Das Elend des Historizismus* (Tübingen: Mohr, 1971), p. xii, states in this connection that it is

::::impossible for any scientific forecaster—whether human being or computer—to predict his or her or us own future results, no matter what methods are used. Any attempt to do so can only achieve its goal post festum.

::::On the methodological significance of this statement see also K.O. Apel, *Die Erklären: Verstehen Kontroverse in transzendental-pragmatischer Sicht* (Frankfurt/ M.: Suhrkamp, 1979), note 19, pp. 44ff.

###

Let us return to the regression equation given at the beginning of the discussion:

::Y = a + b_1 X_1 + b_2 X_2 + e::

and bring the argument full circle. Let the dependent variable ::Y:: in this equation be any intentional action (an action which attempts by some means to achieve a goal preferred over a starting point and other alternatives, and which in various ways manifests knowledge).

By setting up this equation or by determining the values of the constants for a particular set of data, if we accept the normal interpretation, we are making the following assertion:

There exists a complex of causes operating in a constant fashion which causes ::Y::, and it is possible on the basis of our knowledge of this complex and of the way in which it operates (its function type) to predict the occurrence or nonoccurrence of the intentional act ::Y:: (conceived of as a dichotomic 0/1 variable). On the basis of experiences in connection with a particular set of data, the causal relationships explaining ::Y:: are described by a provisional hypothesis as in the above equation (with the values of the constants determined with respect to magnitude). New experiences may mean that these concrete assumptions about the causal variable and function types have to be revised. The equation may be replaced by others incorporating different assumptions. Some examples might be:

1. ::Y = a + b_1 X_1 + b_2 X_2 + b_3 X_3 + e::
2. ::Y = a + b_1 Z + b_1 X_1 + e::
3. ::Y = a + b_1 \log X_1 + b_2 X_2 + e::
4. ::Y = a + b_1 X_1 + b_2 X_2 + b_3 X_1 X_2 + e::


In equation ::(1):: it is assumed that ::X_3:: is a causal variable as well as ::X_2::. Equation ::(2):: assumes that a variable ::Z:: (correlated with ::X_1::) is the cause of ::Y:: and not ::X_1:: as originally assumed. Equation ::(3):: no longer assumes a linear relation in respect to the effect of ::X_1::. Lastly, equation ::(4):: assumes an interactive as well as an additive effect with regard to the two variables ::X_1:: and ::X_2::. No matter which equation is substituted for the original one, however, nor whether the original one is repeatedly found to be valid, it remains the case that ::Y:: can be predicted, however much one may argue about the precise details of the equation.

Our previous discussion demonstrated that this assertion is untenable. ::Y::, qua intentional act, cannot in principle be predicted. This conclusion follows from the argument which we may summarize here:

1. I and—as possible opponents in an argument—other people are able to learn.[^7] (This statement cannot be challenged without implicitly admitting that it is correct. Above all, it must be assumed by anyone undertaking research into causes. To this extent, proposition ::(1):: is valid a priori).
2. If it is possible to learn, one cannot know at any given time what one will know at any later time and how one will act on the basis of this knowledge. (If one did know at any given time what one will come to know at some later time, it would be impossible ever to learn anything—but see proposition ::(1):: on this point.)
3. The assertion that it is possible to predict the future state of one’s own and/or another’s knowledge and the corresponding actions manifesting that knowledge (i.e., to find the variables which can be interpreted as the causes) involves a contradiction. If the subject of a given state of knowledge or of an intentional act can learn, then there are no causes for this; however, if there are causes, then the subject cannot learn—but again see proposition ::(1)::.

[^7]: The transition from one person to the other presupposes the indefensibility of solipsism. There can be no disputing that it is possible to argue with one another that solipsism cannot be defended, since by wanting to argue in its defense one has already thrown it overboard. See on this argument Karl R. Popper, *Conjectures and Refutations* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1969), pp. 293ff.; idem, *Objective Knowledge* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1972), pp. 119ff., 235ff. See also K.O. Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1973), vol. 2, part II, and Jürgen Habermas, *Legitimationsprobleme in Spätkapitalismus* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1973), note 160, p. 1521.

The putative causes of ::Y:: qua intentional act and the putative constants by means of which ::Y:: and these causes are brought into a relationship with one another are in truth nothing more significant than variables which have been found in contingent, covariant relationships with ::Y:: at particular points in time. It is also a purely contingent historico-mathematical fact (but not a confirmation of a hypothesis!) if these covariant relationships were reproduced exactly or even merely approximately with new data. It is in principle only coincidence that people in the same situation defined by the same set of variables act in the same way (bring the same knowledge to bear). For if one is able to learn it is obviously impossible to predict whether a person will actually learn or not from one point in time to the next. It can only be ascertained post festum, as an already established fact. Ultimately, any change in these kinds of covariant relationships must be seen as a contingent fact (and not as a falsification of a hypothesis!). For if one can learn, then not only is it impossible to predict whether one will actually learn in any particular situation, but it is equally impossible to predict what, if anything at all, one will learn.
