## Perbankan, Negara-Negara, dan Politik Internasional: Rekonstruksi Sosiologis Urutan Ekonomi Sekarang   Judul 2

### Uang dan Perbankan

Untuk menjelaskan kemunculan barter, tidak lebih dari asumsi kepentingan pribadi yang didefinisikan secara sempit. Sejauh pria lebih menyukai pilihan dan barang lebih sedikit, dia akan memilih barter dan pembagian kerja karena swasembada.

Munculnya uang dari barter mengikuti dari kepentingan diri sempit yang sama, jika manusia terintegrasi dalam ekonomi barter dan lebih memilih standar kehidupan yang lebih rendah, dia akan memilih untuk memilih dan mendukung media pertukaran yang sama. Dalam memilih uang ia bisa mengatasi pembatasan fundamental yang ditimbulkannya dengan ditukar oleh ekonomi barter, yaitu bahwa membutuhkan adanya kebetulan ganda dari keinginan. Dengan uang kemungkinan untuk pertukaran melebar. Setiap kebaikan saling dipertukarkan, terlepas dari kebetulan ganda atau situasi yang tidak sempurna. Dan dengan nilai tukar yang melebar ini, nilai dari setiap kebaikan yang dimilikinya meningkat.

Jika sebagai manusia terintegrasi dalam ekonomi pertukaran, kepentingan pribadi memaksa dia untuk melihat barang-barang yang sangat berharga yang memiliki sifat uang yang diinginkan seperti keterbukaan, daya tahan, keakraban, mudah dibawa dan kelangkaan, dan untuk menuntut barang semacam itu bukan untuk kepentingan mereka sendiri tetapi demi mempekerjakan mereka sebagai media pertukaran. Dan demi kepentingan dirinya sendiri memilih komoditas itu sebagai media pertukarannya yang juga sering digunakan oleh orang lain. Sebenarnya, ini adalah fungsi uang untuk memfasilitasi pertukaran, untuk memperluas jangkauan kemungkinan pertukaran, dan dengan demikian meningkatkan nilai barang seseorang (sejauh hal itu dianggap terintegrasi dalam ekonomi pertukaran). Jadi, semakin banyak komoditi digunakan sebagai uang, semakin baik kinerjanya. Didorong oleh tidak lebih dari kepentingan pribadi yang sempit, manusia akan selalu memilih medium pertukaran universal yang lebih umum dan, jika mungkin, menjadi yang tidak umum atau nonuniversal. Untuk uang yang lebih umum, semakin luas pasar di mana seseorang terintegrasi, perhitungan nilai dan biaya yang lebih rasional (dari sudut pandang seseorang yang menginginkan integrasi ekonomi dan pemaksaan kekayaan), dan semakin besar manfaat yang dapat diperoleh seseorang dari divisi tenaga kerja.[^1]

Secara empiris, tentu saja komoditas yang dulunya terpilih sebagai uang terbaik-karena-paling-universal adalah emas. Tanpa paksaan pemerintah emas lagi akan dipilih di masa mendatang sebagai komoditi yang paling banyak menjalankan fungsi uang. Kepentingan pribadi akan membuat setiap orang lebih menyukai emas - sebagai media pertukaran yang biasa digunakan - untuk uang lainnya. Sejauh mana setiap individu memandang dirinya dan harta bendanya sebagai terintegrasi ke dalam ekonomi pertukaran, dia lebih memilih akuntansi dalam hal emas daripada dalam hal uang lain, karena penerimaan universal dari emas membuat akuntansi semacam itu merupakan ekspresi paling lengkap dari biaya kesempatan seseorang., dan karenanya berfungsi sebagai panduan terbaik dalam usaha seseorang untuk memaksimalkan kekayaan. Semua uang lainnya akan dikeluarkan dari penggunaan dengan cepat, karena uang yang kurang universal dan internasional seperti uang emas atau nasional, yaitu-bertentangan dengan tujuan mendapatkan uang di tempat pertama. Uang telah diciptakan oleh orang yang tertarik pada diri sendiri untuk meningkatkan kekayaannya dengan mengintegrasikan dirinya ke pasar yang selalu meluas dan akhirnya universal. Di jalan untuk mengejar kepentingan pribadi, uang nasional atau regional akan cepat dikompetisi dan digantikan oleh emas, karena hanya emas yang membuat integrasi ekonomi lengkap dan pasar di seluruh dunia, sehingga memenuhi fungsi akhir uang sebagai media pertukaran yang umum.[^2]

Munculnya uang, semakin banyak uang, dan akhirnya satu uang universal, emas, membebaskan energi produktif yang sebelumnya tetap frustrasi dan menganggur karena adanya kebetulan ganda-keinginan-pembatasan dalam proses pertukaran (seperti keberadaan dari uang bersaing dengan nilai tukar yang berfluktuasi secara bebas). Di bawah barter pasar untuk output produsen terbatas pada contoh double want coincidences. With all prices expressed in terms of gold the producers market is oft-encompassing, and demand takes effect unrestricted by any absence of double coincidences on a worldwide scale. Accordingly, production increases—and increases more with gold than with any other money. With increased production the value of money in turn rises; and the higher purchasing power of money reduces one’s reservation demand for it, lowers one’s effective rate of time preference (the originary rate of interest), and leads to increased capital formation. An upward spiraling process of economic development is set in motion.

This development creates the basis for the emergence of banks as specialized money-handling institutions. Di satu sisi, bank maju untuk memenuhi meningkatnya permintaan akan pengamanan, pengangkutan, dan pembersihan uang. Di sisi lain, mereka memenuhi fungsi yang semakin penting untuk memfasilitasi pertukaran antara kapitalis (penabung) dan pengusaha (investor), yang sebenarnya membuat pembagian kerja yang hampir sempurna antara peran ini. Sebagai lembaga deposito dan khususnya sebagai lembaga simpan pinjam, bank dengan cepat mengasumsikan peringkat pusat syaraf ekonomi. Semakin banyak alokasi dan koordinasi spasial dan temporal sumber daya dan kegiatan ekonomi dilakukan melalui mediasi bank; dan dalam memfasilitasi koordinasi semacam itu kemunculan bank menyiratkan masih ada stimulus lain bagi pertumbuhan ekonomi.[^3]

Sementara demi kepentingan ekonomi setiap orang, hanya ada satu uang universal dan hanya satu unit akun, dan pria yang berusaha memaksimalkan kekayaan tidak akan berhenti sampai tujuan ini tercapai, berlawanan dengan minat seperti itu bahwa hanya ada satu bank atau satu sistem perbankan monopoli. Sebaliknya, kepentingan pribadi memerintahkan agar setiap bank menggunakan uang universal yang sama-emas - dan bahwa saat itu tidak ada persaingan antara uang yang berbeda, namun persaingan bebas antara bank dan sistem perbankan, yang semuanya menggunakan emas, harus ada. Only so long as free entry into banking exists will there be cost efficiency in this as in any other business; yet only as long as this competition concerns services rendered in terms of one and the same money commodity will free banking actually be able to fulfill the very function of money and banking, i.e., of facilitating economic integration rather than disintegration, of widening the market and expanding the division of labor rather than restricting them, of making value and cost accounting more rather than less rational, and hence of increasing rather than decreasing economic wealth. The notion of competition between monies is a *contradiction in adjecto*. Strictly speaking, a monetary system with rival monies of freely fluctuating exchange rates is still a system of (partial) barter, riddled with the problem of requiring double coincidences of wants in order for (some) exchanges to take place. The existence of such a system is dysfunctional of the very purpose of money.[^4] Freely pursuing his own self-interest, man would immediately abandon it—and it would be a fundamental misconception regarding the essence of money to think of the free market not only in terms of competing banks but also in terms of competitive monies.[^5] Competitive monies are not the outcome of free market actions but are invariably the result of coercion, of government imposed obstacles placed in the path of rational economic conduct.

With free banking based on a universal gold standard emerging, the goal of achieving the most cost efficient solution to coordinating and facilitating interspatial and intertemporal exchanges within the framework of a universally integrated market is accomplished. Prices for the service of safekeeping, transporting and clearing money, as well as for advancing money in time-contracts would drop to their lowest possible levels under a regime of free entry. And since these prices would be expressed in terms of one universal money, they would truly reflect the minimum costs of providing market-integrative services.

Moreover, bank competition combined with the fact that money must emerge as a commodity—such as gold—which in addition to its value as money has a commodity value and thus cannot be produced without significant cost-expenditure, also provides the best possible safeguard against fraudulent banking.

As money depositing institutions, banks—much like other institutions depositing fungible commodities yet more so in the case of banks because of the special role of the commodity money—are tempted to issue “fake” warehouse receipts, i.e., notes of deposit not covered by real money, as soon as such banknotes have assumed the role of money substitutes and are treated by market participants as unquestionable equivalents of actually deposited real money. In this situation, by issuing fake or fiat banknotes that physically cannot be distinguished from genuine money substitutes, a bank can—fraudulently and at another’s expense—increase its own wealth. It can directly purchase goods with such fake notes and thus enrich itself in the same way as any simple counterfeiter does. The bank’s real wealth and the wealth of the early recipients of the money increases through these purchases, and at the same time and by the same action the wealth of those receiving the new money late or not at all decreases, due to the inflationary consequences of counterfeiting. Or a bank can use such fiat money to expand its credit and earn interest on it. Once again a fraudulent income and wealth redistribution in the bank’s favor takes place.[^6] Yet in addition, this time a boom-bust cycle is also set in motion: Placed at a lowered interest rate, the newly granted credit causes increased investments and initially creates a boom that cannot be distinguished from an economic expansion; however, this boom must turn bust because the credit that stimulated it does not represent real savings but instead was created out of thin air. Hence, with the entire new and expanded investment structure under way, a lack of capital must arise that makes the successful completion of all investment projects systematically impossible and instead requires a contraction with a liquidation of previous malinvestments.[^7]

Under the gold standard any bank or banking system (including a monopolist one) would be constrained in its own inclination to succumb to such temptations by two requirements essential for successful counterfeiting. On the one hand, the banking public must not be suspicious of the trustworthiness of the bank—that is, its anti-fraud vigilance must be low for otherwise a bank run would quickly reveal the committed fraud. On the other hand, the bank cannot inflate its notes at such a pace that the public loses confidence in the notes’ purchasing power, reduces its reservation demand for them and flees instead towards “real” values, including real money, and thereby drives the counterfeiter into bankruptcy. Under a system of free banking, however, with no legal tender laws and gold as money, an additional constraint on potential bank fraud arises, for then every bank is faced with the existence of nonclients or clients of different banks. If in this situation additional counterfeit money is brought into circulation by a bank, it must invariably reckon with the fact that the money may end up in nonclients’ hands who demand immediate redemption, which the bank then would be unable to grant without at least a painful credit contraction. In fact, such a corrective contraction could only be avoided if the additional fiat money were to go exclusively into the cash reserves of the bank’s own clients and were used by them exclusively for transactions with other clients. Yet since a bank would have no way of knowing whether or not such a specific outcome could be achieved, or how to achieve it, the threat of a following credit contraction would act as an inescapable economic deterrent to any bank fraud.[^8]

[^1]: On the free-market development of money, see Carl Menger, *Principles of Economics* (New York: New York University Press, 1976), pp. 257–85; “Geld,” in Carl Menger, *Gesammelte Werke*, vol. IV (Tübingen: Mohr, 1970).

[^2]: On the gold standard, see Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., ed., *The Gold Standard: An Austrian Perspective* (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1985), Ron Paul and Lewis Lehrman, *The Case for Gold* (San Francisco: Cato Institute, 1983).

[^3]: On banking and in particular the different function of loan and deposit banking, see Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983).

[^4]: See Murray N. Rothbard, *The Case for a 100 Percent Gold Dollar* (Meriden, Conn.: Cobden Press, 1984), pp. 32–34.

[^5]: A highly prominent example for this misconception is F.A. Hayek, *Denationalization of Money* (London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1976); for a critique see Murray N. Rothbard, “Hayek’s Denationalized Money,” *Libertarian Forum* XV, nos. 5–6 (August 1981–January 1982).

[^6]: On the counterfeiting process, see Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking*, chap. IV; also Elgin Groseclose, *Money: The Human Conflict* (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1934), pp. 178 and 273.

[^7]: On the Austrian business cycle theory, see Ludwig von Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit* (lrvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1971); idem, *Human Action* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966), chap. XX; F.A. Hayek, *Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1975); *Prices and Production* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1967); Richard von Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion* (Vienna: Julius Springer, 1934); Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), vol. 2, chap. 12.

[^8]: What about cartels? Could not the competing banks form a cartel and agree on a joint venture in counterfeiting? Again, under free banking this is most unlikely, because a system of free banking is characterized by the complete absence of any economic incentive for cartelization. With no restrictions of entry in existence, any such bank cartel would have to be classified as voluntary and would suffer from the same problems as any voluntary cartel: Faced with the threat of noncartelists and/or new entrants, and recognizing that like all cartel agreements, a banking cartel would favor the less efficient cartel members at the expense of the more efficient ones, there is simply no economic basis for successful action, and any attempt to cartelize would quickly break down as economically inefficient. Moreover, insofar as the counterfeit money would be employed to expand credit, banks acting in concert would set off a full-scale boom-bust cycle. This, too, would deter cartelization. See on the theory of free banking Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 434–48; Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking*, chap. VIII.