### 

Setelah rekonstruksi klasik, dan terutama teori kerja, uang, minat, dan proses kapitalis Austria, sekarang saya akan beralih ke Keynes dan teori "baru" -nya. Sebelum latar belakang penjelasan kita tentang teori yang lama, akan mudah untuk kita mengenali "Teori Umum Ketenagakerjaan, Bunga, dan Uang" milik Keynes yang baru sebagai kecacatan fundamental dan revolusi Keynesian sebagai salah satu skandal intelektual tertua pada abad ke-20.[^23] 

#### Pekerjaan

Keynes mengemukakan sebuah teori yang salah tentang pekerjaan. Bertentangan dengan pandangan klasik, dia mengklaim bahwa ada pengangguran yang tidak disengaja di pasar bebas, dan lebih jauh lagi dia menyebutkan bahwa pasar dapat mencapai ekuilibrium yang stabil dengan tingkat pengangguran yang terus-menerus. Dalam mengklaim bahwa kegagalan pasar semacam itu dimungkinkan, dia berpendapat telah menemukan alasan ekonomi utama untuk mencampuri operasi pasar oleh kekuatan pasar ekstra.

Karena pasar bebas didefinisikan dalam bentuk rumah atau produksi properti pribadi dan kesukarelaan dari semua interaksi antara pemilik properti swasta, maka harus jelas tentang apa yang Keynes klaim untuk menunjukkan secara kasar setara dengan kuadrat lingkaran.

Keynes memulai dengan pernyataan yang salah yang menyatakan bahwa teori klasik tersebut mengasumsikan "bahwa tidak ada pengangguran yang tidak disengaja dalam pengertian yang tepat". [^24] Sebenarnya, tidak diasumsikan hal seperti itu. Teori klasik mengasumsikan bahwa pengangguran tanpa sukarela secara logis-praxeologis tidak dimungkinkan asalkan pasar bebas beroperasi. Pengangguran tanpa disengaja itu memang jumlahnya dapat ada di hadapan institusi pasar ekstra, undang-undang upah minimum, dan lain-lain yang tidak pernah diragukan secara serius.

Setelah kesalahan ini, Keynes kemudian memberikan definisi tentang pengangguran tanpa disengaja:

> Orang-orang menganggur secara tidak sadar jika terjadi kenaikan kecil pada harga barang upah (barang konsumen) secara relatif terhadap upah uang, baik jumlah keseluruhan tenaga kerja yang bersedia bekerja untuk upah uang saat ini dan Permintaan jumlah untuk itu pada upah itu akan lebih besar dari volume pekerjaan yang ada.[^25]

Diterjemahkan ke dalam bahasa Inggris sederhana, apa yang dikatakan Keynes dengan cara khasnya yang tidak jelas adalah bahwa orang-orang secara tidak sadar menganggur jika kenaikan harga secara relatif terhadap tingkat upah yang menyebabkan lebih banyak pekerjaan. [^28] Namun, perubahan harga relatif semacam itu secara logis setara dengan menurunnya tingkat upah riil, dan penurunan upah riil dapat terjadi di pasar yang tidak terganggu oleh penerima upah setiap saat dimana yang mereka inginkan hanya dengan menerima tingkat upah nominal yang lebih rendah dengan harga komoditas yang tersisa di tempat mereka berada. Jika para pekerja memutuskan untuk tidak melakukan ini, tidak ada yang tidak disengaja dalam semua ini. Mengingat permintaan reservasi mereka akan tenaga kerja, mereka memilih untuk memasok jumlah tenaga kerja yang benar-benar dipasok. Pengklasifikasian ini juga sebagai pengangguran sukarela  yang memimiliki kesempatan kerja yang sedikit berubah, jika pada saat lain dengan tingkat upah riil yang lebih rendah, maka jumlah pekerjaan akan meningkat. Berdasarkan logika, hasil seperti itu hanya dapat diajukan jika sementara itu para pekerja telah meningkatkan evaluasi relatif mereka terhadap tingkat upah tertentu dibandingkan dengan permintaan reservasi tenaga kerja mereka (jika tidak, jika tidak ada perubahan seperti itu terjadi, pekerjaan akan menurun dan bukannya meningkat). Kenyataannya, bagaimanapun, seseorang dapat mengubah pikiran seseorang dari satu titik ke waktu ke waktu berikutnya dengan tidak menyiratkan bahwa pilihan sebelumnya tidak disengaja, seperti yang Keynes inginkan. Tentu saja, seseorang dapat menentukan tujuan seseorang sesuai keinginan seseorang, dan dengan gaya yang benar-benar Orwellian bahkan mungkin memilih untuk memanggil sukarela tanpa disengaja dan sukarela secara sukarela. Namun melalui metode ini apapun yang ada di bawah sinar matahari bisa "terbukti," padahal sebenarnya tidak ada substansi apapun yang ditunjukkan. Cara Keynes untuk mendemonstrasikan kemungkinan pengangguran tanpa disengaja adalah bukti omong kosong yang secara keseluruhan tidak mempengaruhi fakta bahwa tidak ada pekerjaan tidak disengaja, dalam pengertian biasa istilah ini, bisa ada di pasar yang tidak terganggu.

Seolah-olah ini tidak cukup, Keynes membantahnya dengan mengatakan bahwa pengangguran tanpa disengaja bisa dibayangkan bahkan di tanah ekuilibrium yang tidak pernah ada. Memang, dia mengkritik Risalah Uangnya sebelumnya dengan mengatakan, "Saya kemudian tidak mengerti bahwa, dalam kondisi tertentu, sistem bisa berada dalam keseimbangan dengan kurang dari kerja penuh". [^27] Namun keseimbangan didefinisikan * sebagai situasi di mana perubahan nilai, teknologi, dan sumber daya yang tidak lagi terjadi di mana semua tindakan sepenuhnya disesuaikan dengan konstelasi data akhir; dan di mana semua faktor produksi kemudian, termasuk tenaga kerja, dipekerjakan semaksimal mungkin (mengingat data yang tidak berubah ini) dan berulang kali dan tanpa henti digunakan dalam pola produksi konstan yang sama. Oleh karena itu, seperti yang telah dikemukakan oleh H. Hazlitt, ditemukannya keseimbangan pengangguran oleh Keynes dalam Teori Umumnya, seperti penemuan lingkaran segitiga yang merupakan sebuah kontradiksi dalam istilah.[^28]

#### Uang

Setelah membuang logika dalam perlakuannya terhadap pekerjaan dan pengangguran, Keynes, dalam pembahasannya tentang uang, kemudian mengeluarkan penalaran ekonomi dengan mengajukan klaim bahwa perubahan uang dan moneter (dapat) memiliki efek sistematis terhadap pendapatan kerja, dan bunga.

Mengingat fakta bahwa "uang" muncul dalam judul Teori Umum, teori positif Keynes tentang uang sangat singkat dan tidak berkembang. Singkatnya, tentu saja bisa menjadi kebaikan. Dalam kasus Keynes, ia menawarkan kesempatan untuk menemukan kesalahan-kesalahan mendasarnya dengan mudah. Bagi Keynes, "*pentingnya uang pada dasarnya mengalir dari keterkaitannya antara masa kini dan masa depan*". [^29] "Uang dalam atribut signifikannya, terutama merupakan perangkat halus untuk menghubungkan masa sekarang dan masa depan".[^30] Bahwa ini kesalahan dari kenyataan bahwa di tanah ekuilibrium yang tidak akan pernah ada uang, [^31] namun bahkan dalam kondisi keseimbangan masih akan ada masa depan dan masa depan, dan keduanya akan tetap terkait. Daripada berfungsi sebagai penghubung ke masa depan, uang berfungsi sebagai alat tukar yang memiliki peran yang sangat terkait erat dengan ketidakpastian masa depan. Tindakan yang selalu dimulai di masa sekarang dan ditujukan untuk tujuan masa depan yang lebih atau kurang jauh dari awal dan merupakan hubungan nyata antara masa sekarang dan masa depan. Ini adalah preferensi waktu sebagai kategori tindakan universal yang memberi kaitan antara saat ini dan masa depan dengan bentuknya yang spesifik. Uang, bertentangan dengan bunga yang mana tidak ada lagi yang menghubungkan masa kini dengan masa depan dibandingkan dengan fenomena ekonomi lainnya, seperti barang nonmoneter. Nilai mereka sekarang juga mencerminkan antisipasi-antisipasi mengenai masa depan yang tidak lebih dan tidak kurang dari pada uang.

From this first misconception regarding the nature of money, all other misconceptions flow automatically. Being defined as a subtle link between present and future, the demand for money (its supply being given), which Keynes, in line with his general inclination of misinterpreting logical-praxeological categories as psychological ones, terms “liquidity preference” or “propensity to hoard,”[^33] is said to be functionally related to the rate of interest (and vice versa).[^34] “Interest,” writes Keynes, “is the reward of not-hoarding,”[^35] “the reward for parting with liquidity,”[^36] which makes liquidity preference in turn the unwillingness to invest in interest-bearing assets. That this is false becomes obvious as soon as one asks the question “What, then, about prices?” The quantity of beer, for instance, that can be bought for a definite sum of money is obviously no less a reward for parting with liquidity than is the interest rate, which would make the demand for money then the unwillingness to buy beer as much as it is an unwillingness to invest.[^37] Formulated in general terms, the demand for money is the unwillingness to buy or rent nonmoney, including interest-bearing assets (land, labor, and/or capital goods, or future goods) *and* non-interest-bearing assets (consumer or present goods). To recognize this is to recognize that the demand for money has nothing to do with investment or with consumption; nor has it anything to do with the ratio of investment-to-consumption expenditures, or the spread between input and output prices (the discount of higher order or future goods versus lower order or present goods). Increases or decreases in the demand for money, other things being equal, lower or raise the overall level of money prices, but real consumption and investment, as well as the real consumption-investment proportion remain unaffected; and such being the case, employment and social income remain unchanged as well. The demand for money determines the spending/cash balance proportion. The investment/consumption proportion, pace Keynes, is an entirely different and unrelated matter. It is solely determined by time-preference.[^38]

The same conclusion is reached if changes in the supply of money (liquidity preference being given) are considered. Keynes claims that an increase in the supply of money, other things being equal, can have a positive effect on employment. He writes, “so long as there is unemployment, employment will change in the same proportion as the quantity of money.”[^39] Yet this is not only a highly curious pronouncement because it *assumes* the existence of unemployed resources instead of *explaining* why such a thing should possibly occur—for, obviously, a resource can be unemployed only because it is either not recognized as scarce at all and thus has no value whatsoever, or because its owner voluntarily prices it out of the market and its unemployment then is no problem that would call for a solution.[^40]

Even if one were to waive this criticism, the statement would still be fallacious. For if other things were indeed equal, then the additional supply of money would simply lead to increased overall prices and simultaneous and proportional increased wage rates, and nothing would change at all. If, contrary to this, employment should increase, this is only possible if wage rates do not rise along with, and to the same extent as, other prices. However, other things then can no longer be said to be equal, because real wage rates would be lowered, and employment can only rise while real wages fall if the relative evaluation of employment versus self-employment (i.e., unemployment) is assumed to have changed. Yet if this is assumed, no increase in the money supply would have been required. The same result (increased employment) could also have been brought about by laborers accepting lower nominal wage rates.

#### Interest

With logic and economic theory thrown out of the window, in his discussion of the interest phenomenon Keynes abandons reason and common sense entirely.

According to Keynes, since money has a systematic impact on employment, income, and interest, interest, in turn—quite consistently, for that matter—must be conceived of as a purely monetary phenomenon.[^41] I need not explain the elementary fallacy of this view. Suffice it to say here again that money would disappear in equilibrium, but interest would not, which demonstrates that interest must be considered a real, not a monetary phenomenon.

Moreover, Keynes, in talking about “functional relationships” and “mutual determination” of variables instead of causal, unidirectional relations, becomes entangled in inescapable contradictions as regards his theory of interest.[^42] As has been explained above, on the one hand Keynes thinks of liquidity preference (and the supply of money) as *determining* the interest rate, such that an increased demand for money, for instance, would raise the interest rate (and an increased supply of money would lower it) and that this then will reduce investment “whilst a decline in the rate of interest may be expected, *ceteris paribus*, to increase the volume of investment.”[^43] On the other hand, characterizing the interest rate as “the reward for parting with liquidity,” he contends that the demand for money is *determined* by the interest rate, such that a fall in the interest rate, for instance, would increase one’s demand for cash (and also, one should add, one’s propensity to consume) and hence lead to *reduced* investment. Obviously, however, a lower interest rate can hardly both increase and decrease investment at the same time. Something must be wrong here.

Keynes, however, combines falsehood and contradiction into one of the most fantastic conspiracy theories ever heard of.

Since interest, according to Keynes, is a purely monetary phenomenon, it is only natural to assume that it can be manipulated at will through monetary policy (provided, of course, one is not restricted in this by the existence of a 100-percent-reserve commodity money standard such as the gold standard).[^44] “There is,” writes Keynes, “no special virtue in the pre-existing rate of interest.”[^45] In fact, if the supply of money is sufficiently increased, the interest rate supposedly can be brought down to zero. Keynes recognizes that this would imply a superabundance of capital goods, and one would think that this realization should have given him cause to reconsider. Not so! On the contrary, in all seriousness he tells us

> that a properly run community equipped with modern technical resources, of which the population is not increasing rapidly, ought to be able to bring down the marginal efficiency of capital in equilibrium approximately to zero within a single generation.[^46]

It is “comparatively easy to make capital goods so abundant that the marginal efficiency of capital is zero (and) this may be the most sensible way of gradually getting rid of many of the objectional features of capitalism.”[^47] “There are no intrinsic reasons for the scarcity of capital.”[^48] Rather, it is “possible for communal saving through the agency of the State to be maintained at a level where it ceases to be scarce.”[^49]

Don’t worry that this would imply that no maintenance or replacement of capital would be needed any longer (for, if this were the case, capital goods would still be scarce and hence command a price), and capital goods instead would have to be “free goods” in the same sense in which air is usually “free.” Don’t worry that if capital goods were no longer scarce, then consumer goods could no longer be scarce either (for, if they were, the means employed to produce them would have to be scarce, too). And don’t worry that in this Garden of Eden, which Keynes promises to establish within one generation (why so long?!), there would no longer be any use for money. For, as he informs us, “I am myself impressed by the great social advantages of increasing the stock of capital until it ceases to be scarce.”[^50] Who would dare disagree with this! [^51]

Yet more is to come. Because, as Keynes sees it, there are some obstacles on the path toward paradise. For one thing, the gold standard stands in the way, because it makes the expansion of credit impossible (or difficult at least, in that a credit expansion would lead to an outflow of gold and a subsequent economic contraction). Hence Keynes’s repeated polemics against this institution.[^52] Furthermore, there is the just explained problem of his own making: that a lower interest rate supposedly increases and decreases investment simultaneously. And it is to get out of this logical mess that Keynes comes up with a conspiracy theory: For, while the interest rate must be reduced to zero so as to eliminate scarcity, as we were just told, the lower the interest rate the lower also the reward for parting with liquidity. The lower the interest rate, that is to say, the lower the incentive for capitalists to invest, because their profits will be reduced accordingly. Thus, they will try to undermine, and conspire against, any attempt to resurrect the Garden of Eden.

Driven by “animal spirits,”[^53] “gambling instincts,”[^54] and “addicted to the money-making passion,”[^55] they will conspire so “that capital has to be kept scarce enough.”[^56] “The acuteness and peculiarity of our contemporary problem arises, therefore,” writes Keynes,

> out of the possibility that the average rate of interest which will allow a reasonable average level of employment [and of social income] is one so unacceptable to wealth owners that it cannot be readily established merely by manipulating the quantity of money.[^57]

In fact,

> the most stable, and least easily shifted, element in our contemporary economy has been hitherto, and may prove to be in the future, the minimum rate of interest acceptable to the generality of wealth owners.[^58]

Fortunately, we are informed, there is a way out of this predicament; through “the euthanasia of the rentier, and, consequently, the euthanasia of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the scarcity-value of capital.”[^59] And surely they deserve such a fate. For “the business world” is ruled by an “uncontrollable and disobedient psychology,”[^60] and private investment markets are

> under the influence of purchasers largely ignorant of what they are buying and of speculators who are more concerned with forecasting the next shift of market sentiment than with a reasonable estimate of the future yield of capital assets.[^61]

As a matter of fact, don’t we all know that “there is no clear evidence from experience that the investment policy which is socially advantageous coincides with that which is most profitable;”[^62] indeed, that the decisions of private investors depend largely on “the nerves and hysteria and even the digestions and reactions to the weather,”[^63] rather than on rational calculation?! Thus, concludes Keynes, “the duty of ordering the current volume of investment cannot safely be left in private hands.”[^64] Instead, to turn the present misery into a land of milk and honey, “a somewhat comprehensive socialization of investment will prove the only means.”[^65]

> The State, which is in a position to calculate the marginal efficiency of capital-goods on long views and on the basis of the general social advantage [must take] an ever greater responsibility for directly organizing investment.[^66]

I trust that none of this requires further comment. It is too obvious that these are the outpourings of someone who deserves to be called anything, except an economist.

[^23]: For pro-Keynesian literature see in particular Seymour P. Harris, ed., *The New Economics* (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1947); Alvin Hansen, *A Guide to Keynes* (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1953); for anti-Keynesian literature see in particular Henry Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics”* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1959); idem, ed., *The Critics of Keynesian Economics* (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1983).

[^24]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 21; also pp. 6, 15.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 15\. Keynes at this point promises an alternative definition to be given on p. 26; revealingly, no such definition appears there or anywhere else in the book!

[^26]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 30.

[^27]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 242–43; also p. 28.

[^28]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” p. 52.

[^29]: Keynes, *General Theory*, p. 293.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 294.

[^31]: Mises explains:

> Let us assume that there is only gold money and only one central bank. With the successive progress toward the state of an evenly rotating economy all individuals and firms restrict step by step their holding of cash and the quantities of gold thus released flow into nonmonetary—industrial—employment. When the equilibrium of the evenly rotating economy is finally reached, there are no more cash holdings; no more gold is used for monetary purposes. The individuals and firms own claims against the central bank, the maturity of each part of which precisely corresponds to the amount they will need on the respective dates for the settlement of their obligations. The central bank does not need any reserves as the total sum of the daily payments of its customers exactly equals the total sum of withdrawals. All transactions can in fact be effected through transfer in the bank’s books without any recourse to cash. Thus the “money” of this system is not a medium of exchange; it is not money at all; it is merely a *numéraire*, an ethereal and undetermined unit of accounting of that vague and indefinable character which the fancy of some economists and the errors of many laymen mistakenly have attributed to money. (*Human Action*, p. 249)

[^32]: Keynes recognizes that money also has something to do with uncertainty. The fundamental mistake in his theory of money pointed out here, however, surfaces again when he relates money not to uncertainty as such, but, more specifically, to uncertainty of interest rates. “The necessary condition” [for the existence of money] he writes, “is the existence of uncertainty as to the future rate of interest” (*General Theory*, p. 168; also p. 169). See also the following discussion.

[^33]: Ibid., p. 174.

[^34]: On the absurd implications of the assumption of functional—rather than causal—relations, see the discussion below.

[^35]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 174.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 167.

[^37]: See also Hazlitt, The Failure of the “New Economics,” pp. 188f.

[^38]: See also Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 40–41; Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 521–23.

[^39]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 296.

[^40]: See also W.H. Hutt, *The Theory of Idle Resources* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1977).

[^41]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 173; see also his laudatory remarks on mercantilist economics, and in particular, Silvio Gesell, as precursors of this view on pp. 341, 355.

[^42]: See on this also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 687–89.

[^43]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 173.

[^44]: See also below.

[^45]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 328.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 220.

[^47]: Ibid., p. 221.

[^48]: lbid., p. 376.

[^49]: Ibid., p. 376.

[^50]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 325.

[^51]: See also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the* “*New Economics,*” pp. 231–35\. What about the seemingly obvious objection, that the expansion of monetary credit through which Keynes wants to bring about the reduction of the interest rate to zero is nothing but an expansion of paper, and that the problem of scarcity is a matter of “real” goods, which can only be overcome through “genuine savings”? To this he has the following funny answer in *The General Theory*:

> The notion that the creation of credit by the banking system allows investment to take place to which “no genuine saving” corresponds, i.e., the idea that saving and investment … can differ from one another, is to be explained, I think, by an optical illusion. (p. 81)
> 
> [T]he savings which result from this decision are just as genuine as any other savings. No one can be compelled to own the additional money corresponding to the new bank-credit unless he deliberately prefers to hold more money rather than some other form of wealth. (p. 83)
> 
> The new money is not “forced” on anyone. (p. 328)

As Henry Hazlitt remarks,

> [o]n the same reasoning we can create any amount of new “savings” we wish overnight, simply by printing that amount of new paper money, because *somebody* will necessarily hold that new paper money! (*The Failure of the “New Economics,”* p. 227)

[^52]: See Keynes, *The General Theory,* pp. 129ff., 336ff., 348f. On Keynes’s role in the actual destruction of the gold standard see Henry Hazlitt, *From Bretton Woods to World Inflation* (Chicago: Regnery, 1984).

[^53]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 161.

[^54]: Ibid., p. 157.

[^55]: Ibid., p. 374.

[^56]: Ibid., p. 217.

[^57]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 308–09.

[^58]: Ibid., p. 309, and he adds, in a footnote, “The nineteenth-century saying, quoted by Bagehot, that ‘John Bull’ can stand many things, but he cannot stand 2 per cent.” On Keynes’s conspiracy theory see also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* pp. 3, 16–18.

[^59]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 376, also p. 221.

[^60]: Ibid., p. 317.

[^61]: Ibid., p. 316.

[^62]: Ibid., p. 157.

[^63]: Ibid., p. 162.

[^64]: Ibid., p. 320.

[^65]: Ibid., p. 378.

[^66]: Ibid., p. 164.
