Setelah jatuhnya kekaisaran Romawi, Eropa Barat berangsur-angsur jatuh ke dalam sistem teritorial yang sangat anarkis yang diperintah oleh pemerintah feodal skala kecil. Difasilitasi oleh anarki internasional ini, yang cenderung mengurangi kekuatan internal masing-masing pemerintah dan memudahkan pergerakan populasi, [^27] dan diberi makan oleh ideologi hukum alam dan hak alamiah, yang muncul sebagai teori yang semakin kuat dalam intelektual. elit Gereja Katolik, naluri manusia yang jelas bahwa hanya milik pribadi yang sesuai dengan kodrat seseorang saat makhluk rasional mulai berlaku. <sup id="fnref:28"><a href="#fn:28" class="footnote-ref">2 ​</a></sup> Pusat-pusat kecil berkembang di mana kekuasaan pemerintah dipangkas jauh-jauh sampai sekarang tidak diketahui: kota-kota di Italia utara, terutama Venesia, Liga Hanseatic, seperti Lübeck dan Hamburg, dan Flanders dan Low Countries, khususnya Antwerp dan Amsterdam. Di sana, gagasan feodal tentang perbudakan, perbudakan, dan masyarakat kelas tegar yang hierarkis secara hierarkis digantikan oleh opini publik, bahwa alih-alih mendukung kebebasan, persamaan, hak kepemilikan, dan hubungan kontraktual. Opini publik ini terus mendapat momentum dengan masuknya populasi baru secara terus-menerus, terinspirasi oleh gagasan serupa dan tertarik oleh kemakmuran yang tak tertandingi yang dapat dibuktikan oleh kebebasan itu sendiri yang mampu menghasilkannya. [^29]

Namun, gagasan rasionalitas manusia, kebebasan, dan kepemilikan pribadi belum cukup luas. Berakar hanya di beberapa daerah yang tersebar, kekuatan feodal yang lebih atau kurang jauh yang secara alami mengenali perkembangan semacam itu sebagai ancaman terhadap stabilitas mereka sendiri dapat sekali lagi memasang kembali kekuatan. Dengan mengkonsolidasikan wilayah mereka dalam proses perjuangan dan peperangan yang panjang ke dalam negara-negara berskala besar dan dengan demikian memusatkan dan memusatkan kekuatan mereka, mereka dapat berhasil dalam menghancurkan persaingan gagasan kebebasan yang berkembang di beberapa tempat dan menerapkan kembali eksploitatif mereka. menguasai daerah tersebut dengan kekuatan yang meningkat. Era absolutisme telah dimulai, dan dengan itu era super-power feodal, monarki, yang berhasil memusatkan sistem eksploitasi feodal atas wilayah-wilayah yang untuk pertama kalinya mencapai ukuran negara-negara modern yang dikenal. Dengan absolutisme yang terus berlanjut, wilayah persaingan kota bebas kembali dipaksa mengalami kemunduran ekonomi dan stagnasi, yang dalam beberapa kasus berlangsung berabad-abad.[^30]

Namun kemenangan ini tidak mengalahkan gagasan kebebasan dan kepemilikan pribadi. Sebaliknya, gagasan ini menemukan ungkapan yang lebih kuat dan semakin mengilhami opini publik. Dipengaruhi oleh tradisi hak asasi alam yang terus maju, tradisi intelektual sekuler lainnya muncul dan memikat pikiran: Tradisi yang kemudian dikenal sebagai liberalisme klasik dan lebih dipusatkan pada gagasan kebebasan individu dan properti dan dikhususkan untuk pembenaran intelektualnya.[^31] Selain itu, didorong oleh pengalaman kemakmuran yang tak tertandingi yang dicapai dalam kondisi kebebasan dan kontraktualisme, perkembangan pemikiran ekonomi mengambil langkah besar. Kemudian, doktrin-doktrin meracilisme, cameralisme, dan * Polizeiwissenschaft * kemudian dibongkar secara intelektual oleh sejumlah besar ekonom politik baru yang secara sistematis menjelaskan, dengan ketelitian dan kelengkapan yang luar biasa, peran tak terpisahkan dari kepemilikan pribadi dan kontraktualisme untuk proses produksi dan pembentukan kekayaan dan yang sesuai dengan kebijakan radikal laissez-faire.[^32]

Dari sekitar tahun 1700 dan seterusnya, opini publik terpukau oleh gagasan ini sedemikian rupa sehingga kondisi revolusioner muncul di dalam monarki absolutis di Eropa Barat. Inggris telah melewati sejumlah revolusi selama abad ketujuh belas yang sangat menghancurkan kekuatan negara absolutis. Abad kedelapan belas berakhir dengan peristiwa bencana besar revolusi Amerika dan Prancis. Kemudian sampai sekitar pertengahan abad kesembilan belas serangkaian pergolakan konstan secara bertahap menghapus eksploitasi pemerintah ke titik terendah sepanjang masa di seluruh Eropa Barat.

Gagasan yang telah menaklukkan opini publik dan yang telah membuat pengurangan kekuatan pemerintahan ini mungkin adalah bahwa kebebasan individu dan kepemilikan pribadi hanya, terbukti dengan sendirinya, alami, tidak dapat diganggu gugat dan suci, dan bahwa penyerbu hak semacam itu, agen pemerintah tidak kurang (atau lebih dari itu) daripada pelaku pribadi, harus dianggap dan diperlakukan sebagai orang yang menghina yang menghina.

Dengan setiap langkah sukses menuju pembebasan, gerakan tersebut semakin kuat. Sebagai tambahan, yang disebut Revolusi Industri yang telah diantar oleh perubahan ideologis ini dan telah membawa tingkat pertumbuhan ekonomi yang belum pernah terjadi sebelumnya, yang mempertahankan untuk pertama kalinya populasi yang terus meningkat dan secara bertahap namun terus meningkatkan standar hidup yang umum, diciptakan optimisme yang hampir tak terbatas. [^33] Yang pasti, di Eropa Barat masih banyak despotisme feodal dan absolut yang ditinggalkan bahkan selama paruh pertama abad kesembilan belas ketika ideologi kebebasan dan kepemilikan pribadi dan kewaspadaan anti-statistika mencapai tingkat popularitas tertinggi, namun kemajuan menuju erosi kekuasaan eksploitatif yang semakin jauh dari pemerintah dan terhadap kebebasan dan kemakmuran ekonomi tampak hampir tak terbendung. [^34] Selain itu, sekarang ada sebuah Amerika yang independen, bebas dari masa lalu feodal dan hampir tidak memiliki pemerintahan sama sekali, yang menganggap sebuah peran serupa dengan kota bebas abad pertengahan: berfungsi sebagai sumber inspirasi ideologis dan sebuah pusat daya tarik tapi pada skala yang jauh lebih besar. <sup id="fnref:35"><a href="#fn:35" class="footnote-ref"> 9 </ 0></p> 

<p>
  Today, little is left of this ethic of private property and its anti-government vigilance. Although they now take place on a much grander scale, governmental appropriations of private property owners are overwhelmingly regarded as legitimate. There is no longer a general public opinion that regards government as an antisocial institution based on coercion and unjust property acquisitions, to be opposed and ridiculed everywhere and at all times on principled grounds. No longer is it generally regarded as morally despicable to propagate or, even worse, to actively participate in the enforcement of acts of expropriation, and no longer is it the general opinion that one would not have any private dealings whatsoever with people who engaged in such activities.
</p>

<p>
  On the contrary, instead of being laughed off the stage or met with open hostility or passive indignation, such people are respected as decent and honest men. The politician who actively supports a continuation of the ongoing system of non-contractual property taxation and regulation or who even demands its expansion is treated everywhere with respect, rather than contempt. The intellectual who justifies taxation and regulation receives recognition as a deep and profound thinker in the public eye, instead of being exposed as an intellectual fraud. The IRS agent is regarded as a man doing a job just as legitimate as yours and mine, and not as an outcast that no one wishes to have as a relative, friend, or neighbor.
</p>

<p>
  How could government accomplish such a feat and bring about a change in public opinion that removed the former constraint on its size and instead allowed (and still allows) it to grow in absolute as well as relative terms?<fnref target="36" />
</p>

<p>
  There can be no doubt that the key element in this turn-around of public opinion that started to take hold in Western Europe around the mid-nineteenth century, around the turn of this century in the U.S., and then at a steadily accelerating pace everywhere after World War I<fnref target="37" /> has been the emergence of attractive new—implicitly or explicitly—statist ideologies.
</p>

<p>
  In fact, states have always been aware of the decisive importance of state-supportive ideologies for stabilizing and increasing their exploitative grip on a population, and in this knowledge they have always made attempts to exert their control, above all, over the institutions of education. Even at their weakest, it should appear natural to see them give particular attention to “correct” ideological instruction and to concentrate whatever is left of their power on the destruction of all independent institutions of learning and their take-over into the states’ monopolistic hands. Accordingly, in order to regain the upper hand in the permanent struggle of ideas, since the mid-nineteenth century a steady process of nationalizing or socializing schools and universities (with one of the most recent examples being the unsuccessful attempt by the Mitterand government to crush France’s Catholic schools) and lengthening the period of compulsory schooling has taken place.<fnref target="38" />
</p>

<p>
  Yet pointing out this and the related facts of an increasingly close alliance between state and intellectuals<fnref target="39" /> and the latter’s rewriting history in line with statist ideologies merely puts the problem into focus. Indeed, when one hears about the state’s take-over of the system of education, must one not immediately ask how it could succeed in doing so if public opinion were really committed to a private property ethic?! Such a take-over presupposes a change in public opinion. How, then, was this accomplished, especially in view of the fact that such a change implies the acceptance of manifestly wrong ideas and thus can hardly be explained as an endogenously motivated process of intellectual advancement?
</p>

<p>
  It would seem that such a change toward falsehood requires the systematic introduction of exogenous forces: A true ideology is capable of supporting itself merely by virtue of being true. A false one needs reinforcement by outside influences with a clear-cut, tangible impact on people in order to be capable of generating and supporting a climate of intellectual corruption.
</p>

<p>
  It is to these tangible, ideology-supporting and reinforcing factors that one must turn to understand the decline of the private property ethic and the corresponding rise of statism during the last 100 to 150 years.<fnref target="40" />
</p>

<p>
  I will discuss four such factors and explain their corruptive function for public opinion. All are changes in the organizational structure of the state. The first one is the state’s structural adjustment from a military or police state toward a redistributive one. (The prototype of such an organizational change is the often copied Prussia under Bismarck.) Instead of a governmental structure that is characterized by a small ruling class that uses its exploitatively appropriated resources almost exclusively for pure governmental consumption or for the maintenance of its military and police forces, states now increasingly engage in a policy of actively buying support among the people outside of the governmental apparatus itself. Through a system of transfer payments, grants of privilege to special clients, and governmental production and provision of certain “civilian” goods and services (as for instance education), the population is made increasingly dependent on the continuation of state rule. People outside the governmental apparatus increasingly have a tangible financial stake in its existence and would be harmed, at least in the short run and in parts of their existence, if the government were to lose power. Quite naturally, this dependency tends to reduce resistance and increase support. Exploitation may still seem reprehensible, but it is less so if one also happens to be someone who at least on some fronts is a legal benefactor of such actions.
</p>

<footnotes>
  <fn name="27">
    <p>
      The importance of international anarchy for the erosion of feudalism and the rise of capitalism has been justly emphasized by Jean Baechler, <em>The Origins of Capitalism</em> (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1976), esp. chap. 7\. He writes: “The constant expansion of the market, both in extensiveness and in intensity, was the result of an absence of a political order extending over the whole of Western Europe” (p. 73). “The expansion of capitalism owes its origin and <em>raison d’etre</em> to political anarchy…. Collectivism and state management have only succeeded in school textbooks” (p. 77).
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        All power tends toward the absolute. If it is not absolute, this is because some kind of limitations have come into play … those in the positions of power at the center ceaselessly tried to erode these limitations. They never succeeded, and for the reason that also seems to me to be tied to the international system: a limitation of power to act externally and the constant threat of foreign assault (the two characteristics of a multi-polar system) imply that power is also limited internally and must rely on autonomous centers of decision-making and so may use them only sparingly. (p. 78)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="28">
    <p>
      The central characteristic of the modern natural law tradition (as represented by St. Thomas Aquinas, Luis de Molina, Francisco Suarez, and the late sixteenth century Spanish Scholastics, and the Protestant Hugo Grotius) was its thorough rationalism: its idea of universally valid, absolute, and immutable principles of human conduct that are—ultimately independent of any theological beliefs—to be discovered by and founded in and reason alone. “Man,” writes Frederick C. Copleston, [<em>Aquinas</em> (London: Penguin Books, 1955), pp. 213–14] cannot read, as it were, the mind of God … (but) he can discern the fundamental tendencies and needs of his nature, and by reflecting on them he can come to a knowledge of the natural moral law…. Every man possesses … the light of reason whereby he can reflect … and promulgate to himself the natural law, which is the totality of the universal precepts of dictates of right reason concerning the good which is to be pursued and the evil which is to be shunned.
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        On the origin and development of the natural rights doctrine and its idea of justice and property (including all the statist failings and slips of its aforementioned heroes) see Richard Tuck, <em>Natural Rights Theories</em> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979); on the revolutionary character of the idea of natural law see Lord (John) Acton, <em>Essays on Freedom and Power</em> (Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press. 1948); as an eminent contemporary natural rights philosopher see Henry Veatch, <em>Human Rights</em> (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985).
      </p>
    </blockquote>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="29">
    <p>
      On the rise of the cities see C.M. Cipolla, <em>Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and Economy 1000–1700</em> (New York: Norton, 1980), chap. 4\. Europe around 1000, writes Cipolla,
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        was poor and primitive … made up of numberless rural microcosms—the manors…. Society was dominated by a spirit of resignation, suspicion, and fear toward the outside world…. The arts, education, trade, production, and the division of labor were reduced to a minimal level. The use of money almost completely disappeared. The population was small, production meager, and poverty extreme…. The prevailing ideas reflected a brutal and superstitious society—fighting and praying were the only respectable activities…. Those who labored were regarded as despicable serfs…. In this depressed and depressing world, the rise of cities between the tenth and thirteenth centuries represented a new element which changed the course of history. (p. 144)
      </p>
      
      <p>
        At the root of urban growth was a massive migratory movement. (p. 145)
      </p>
      
      <p>
        The town was to the people of Europe from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries what America was to Europeans in the nineteenth century. The town was the “frontier,” a new and dynamic world where people felt they could break their ties with an unpleasant past, where people hoped they could find opportunities for economic and social success, where sclerotic traditional institutions and discriminations no longer counted, and where there would be ample reward for initiative, daring, and industriousness (p. 146). In the feudal world, a vertical arrangement typically prevailed, where relations between men were dictated by the concepts of fief and service; investiture and homage; lord, vassal, and serf. In the cities, a horizontal arrangement emerged, characterized by cooperation among equals. (p. 148)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <p>
      See also Henri Pirenne, <em>Medieval Cities</em> (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1952), chap. 5; Michael Tigar and Madeleine Levy, <em>Law and the Rise of Capitalism</em> (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1977).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="30">
    <p>
      See on this Carolyn Webber and Aaron Wildavsky, <em>A History of Taxation and Expenditure in the Western World</em> (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986), pp. 235–41; Pirenne, <em>Medieval Cities</em>, pp. 179–80, pp. 227f.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="31">
    <p>
      As the outstanding champion of this tradition see John Locke, <em>Two Treatises of Government</em>, ed. Peter Laslett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1960).
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        [E]very man has a property in his own person. This nobody has any right to but himself. The labour of his body and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the state that nature hath provided, and left in it, he hath mixed his labour with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property. It being by him removed from the common state nature placed it in, it hath by his labour something annexed to it that excludes the common right of other men. For this labour being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but he can have a right to what that is once joined to. (p. 305)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <p>
      See also Ernest K. Bramsted and K.J. Melhuish, eds., <em>Western Liberalism</em> (London: Longman, 1978).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="32">
    <p>
      See on these developments of economic theory Marjorie Grice-Hutchinson, <em>The School of Salamanca: Readings in Spanish Monetary History</em> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1952); Raymond de Roover, <em>Business, Banking, and Economic Thought</em> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974); Murray N. Rothbard, “New Light on the Prehistory of the Austrian School” in Edwin Dolan, ed., <em>The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics</em> (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); on the outstanding contributions in particular of Richard Cantillon and A.R.J. Turgot see <em>Journal of Libertarian Studies</em> 7, no. 2 (1985) (which is devoted to Cantillon’s work) and Murray N. Rothbard, <em>The Brilliance of Turgot</em> (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, Occasional Paper Series, 1986); see also Joseph A. Schumpeter, <em>A History of Economic Analysis</em> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1954).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="33">
    <p>
      On the Industrial Revolution and its misinterpretation by the orthodox (school-book) historiography see F.A. Hayek, ed., <em>Capitalism and the Historians</em> (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="34">
    <p>
      In fact, though the decline of liberalism began around the mid-nineteenth century, the optimism that it had created survived until the early twentieth century. Thus, John Maynard Keynes could write [<em>The Economic Consequences of the Peace</em> (London: Macmillan, 1919)]:
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        What an extraordinary episode in the economic progress of man that age was which came to an end in August 1914! The greater part of the population, it is true, worked hard and lived at a low standard of comfort, yet were, to all appearances, reasonably contented with this lot. But escape was possible, for any man of capacity or character at all exceeding the average, into the middle and upper classes, for whom life offered, at a low cost and with the least trouble, convenience, comforts, and amenities beyond the compass of the richest and most powerful monarchs of other ages…. But, most important of all, he [man] regarded this state of affairs as normal, certain, and permanent, except in the direction of further improvement, and any deviation from it as aberrant, scandalous, and avoidable. The projects and politics of militarism and imperialism, of racial and cultural rivalries, of monopolies, restrictions, and exclusion, which were to play the serpent to this paradise, were little more than the amusements of his daily newspaper, and appeared to exercise almost no influence at all on the ordinary course of social and economic life, the internationalization of which was nearly complete in practice. (pp. 6–7)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
    
    <p>
      For a similar account see also J.P. Taylor, <em>English History 1914–15</em> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965), p. 1.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="35">
    <p>
      Characterizing nineteenth-century America Robert Higgs (<em>Crisis and Leviathan</em> [New York: Oxford University Press, 1987]) writes:
    </p>
    
    <blockquote>
      <p>
        There was a time, long ago, when the average American could go about his daily business hardly aware of the government—especially the federal government. As a farmer, merchant, or manufacturer, he could decide what, how, when, and where to produce and sell his goods, constrained by little more than market forces. Just think: no farm subsidies, price supports, or acreage controls; no Federal Trade Commission; no antitrust laws; no Interstate Commerce Commission. As an employer, employee, consumer, investor, lender, borrower, student, or teacher, he could proceed largely according to his own lights. Just think: no National Labor Relations Board; no federal consumer “protection” laws; no Securities and Exchange Commission; no Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; no Department of Health and Human Services. Lacking a central bank to issue national paper currency, people commonly used gold coins to make purchases. There were no general sales taxes, no Social Security taxes, no income taxes. Though governmental officials were as corrupt then as now—maybe more so—they had vastly less to be corrupt with. Private citizens spent about fifteen times more than all governments combined. (p. IX)
      </p>
    </blockquote>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="36">
    <p>
      On the following see in particular A.V. Dicey, <em>Lectures on the Relation Between Law and Public Opinion in England</em> (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books, 1981); Elie Halevy, <em>A History of the English People in the 19th Century</em>, 2 vols. (London: Benn, 1961); W.H. Greenleaf, <em>The British Political Tradition</em>, 3 vols. (London: Methuen, 1983–87); Arthur E. Ekirch, <em>The Decline of American Liberalism</em> (New York: Atheneum, 1976); Higgs, <em>Crisis and Leviathan</em>.
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="37">
    <p>
      On the worldwide excesses of statism since World War I see Paul Johnson, <em>Modern Times: The World from the Twenties to the Eighties</em> (New York: Harper and Row, 1983).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="38">
    <p>
      On the relation between state and education see Murray N. Rothbard, <em>Education, Free and Compulsory: The Individual’s Education</em> (Wichita, Kans.: Center for Independent Education, 1972).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="39">
    <p>
      On the relation between state and intellectuals see Julien Benda, <em>The Treason of the Intellectuals</em> (New York: Norton, 1969).
    </p>
  </fn>
  
  <fn name="40">
    <p>
      On the following see in particular Hoppe, <em>Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat</em>, chaps. 1, 5; idem, <em>A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism</em>, chap. 8.
    </p>
  </fn>
</footnotes>