### Rasionalisme dan Relativisme dalam Ilmu Pengetahuan Alam dan Sosial


Rasionalisme filosofis mengklaim bahwa manusia mampu mengenali fondasi serta prinsip dari pengetahuan tertinggi. Hal tersebut memberikan pengakuan bahwa semua pengetahuan yang harus dipikirkan sejauh yang dikemukakan tentang klaim pengetahuan apa pun (dan oleh sebab itu tidak dapat dibantah secara bermakna karena ini adalah prasyarat keraguan yang berarti) pada akhirnya dapat dibenarkan atau bersifat apriori valid. Hukum kontradiksi adalah contoh dari pengetahuan yang demikian. Selain itu rasionalisme filosofis menegaskan bahwa berdasarkan pengakuan atas kebenaran akhir, manusia mampu melakukan kemajuan ilmiah yang sistematis.

Relativisme membantah keberadaan pondasi pengetahuan yang absolut dan kemungkinan dari perkembangan ilmiah.

Sepertinya terdapat sedikit atau tidak ada bukti untuk mendukung relativisme dalam ilmu pengetahuan alam. Tidak bisa dipungkiri bahwa sejarah ilmu pengetahuan alam telah menjadi salah satu kemajuan yang berlanjut, manusia telah mencapai penguasaan atas alam yang jauh melampaui usia yang sudah berlalu. Selain itu, disiplin ilmu seperti logika proposisional, aritmatika, geometri Euclidean, mekanika rasional (mekanika klasik tanpa gravitasi), dan kronometri, yang kesemuanya disebut "protofisika," memberikan contoh sempurna mengenai gagasan rasionalis tentang pengetahuan yang akhirnya ditemukan. Logika dan protofisika harus diasumsikan jika seseorang mengatakan sesuatu yang sangat berarti, atau jika seseorang membuat pengukuran ruang, waktu, dan materi empiris yang oleh karenanya tidak dapat dipungkiri oleh pengalaman atau penilaian manusia. (Geometri Euclidean misalnya, tidak dapat dikatakan telah dipalsukan oleh teori relativitas karena pembentukan teori relativitas mengandaikan validitas geometri Euclidean dalam konstruksi instrumen pengukuran.)

Sebaliknya, dalam kesepakatan penuh dengan klaim dari rasionalisme, terlihat bahwa justru status logika dan protofisika sangat sesuai dengan teori justifikasi apriori yang menjadikan kemajuan dalam ilmu pengetahuan empiris se-sistematis mungkin.[^1]

[^1]: Khususnya disini Paul Lorenzen, *Methodisches Denken* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968); idem, *Normative Logic and Ethics* (Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969),

::::> Geometri, kronometri dan hylometri [mekanika rasional] adalah teori apriori yang membuat pengukuran empiris terhadap ruang, waktu dan material "mungkin." Mereka harus didirikan sebelum fisika dalam pengertian modern dari semua ilmu pengetahuan empiris dengan bidang kekuatan hipotetisnya bisa dimulai. Oleh sebab itu, saya ingin menyebut ketiga disiplin ini dengan nama umum: *protofisika*. Kalimat-kalimat sebenarnya dari protofisika adalah kalimat-kalimat yang bisa dipertahankan berdasarkan logika, aritmatika dan analisis, definisi serta norma ideal yang memungkinkan pengukuran. (p. 60)

::::Lihat juga Peter Janich, *Die Protophysik der Zeit* (Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut, 1969); Friedrich Kambartel, *Erfahrung und Struktur* [Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968]).

Pandangan tentang ilmu alam dan perkembangannya mendapat kecaman dibalik kenamaan buku Thomas Kuhn, *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*.[^2] Didalam analisis secara rinci mengenai episode pusat dalam sejarah ilmu pengetahuan empiris, Kuhn didalamnya melawan pandangan bahwa proses pengembangan ilmiah bisa digambarkan sebagai kemajuan bertahap menuju kebenaran melalui serangkaian dugaan hipotetis, eksperimen penting, dan penghapusan teori eksperimen yang dipalsukan, serta setiap generasi masa depan mengetahui lebih dari yang sebelumnya. Sebagai gantinya, menurut Kuhn ini adalah proses nonkumulatif dan nonteleologis. Berbagai "paradigma" atau pandangan dasar mengenai esensi alam diikuti dan digantikan oleh satu sama lain sebagai ortodoksi sementara, dengan masing-masing paradigma kebal dari dan tak terbantahkan oleh pengalaman serta paradigma yang berbeda yang tidak mungkin dibandingkan terhadap satu sama lain. Pergeseran paradigma tidak dimotivasi oleh pengalaman yang tak terbantahkan tetapi serupa dengan perubahan kepercayaan. Paradigma lama mati karena para ilmuwan yang telah mempromosikan mereka sudah meninggal; yang baru mengambil tempat mereka sebagai ilmuwan generasi baru, terinfeksi oleh demam perubahan, tumbuh dengan setiap generasi mendapatkan pengetahuan baru dari penerapan keyakinan baru dan juga kehilangan pengetahuan lama karena telah meninggalkan paradigma generasi masa lalu.

[^2]: Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970; also Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave, eds., *Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970).

Apakah kemudian karya Kuhn meminta revisi dari interpretasi rasionalis ilmu alam dan membuat sebuah kasus untuk relativisme? Sementara Kuhn cenderung berpikir demikian, sedangkan yang lain terutama Paul Feyerabend, malah meradikalisasi aspirasi relativistik Kuhn menjadi "anarkisme metodologis" dengan tangisan pertempuran "apapun yang terjadi,”[^3] tidak diragukan lagi sekalipun itu Kuhn, Feyerabend, maupun orang lain telah berhasil meyakinkan masyarakat umum di luar menara gading akademisi untuk menerima sebuah model relativistik dari ilmu pengetahuan alam. Sekarang seperti sebelumnya, masyarakat umum yakin akan pandangan dari rasionalisme, dan seharusnya demikian.

[^3]: See Paul Feyerabend, *Against Method* (London: New Left Books, 1975); idem, *Science in a Free Society* (London: New Left Books, 1978); idem, *Wissenschaftals Kunst* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1984).

Ini bukan untuk mengatakan bahwa tidak ada sebuah kebenaran parsial yang terkandung dalam penyelidikan Kuhn dan Feyerabend yang sangat menarik. Memang benar dan patut dicatat, bahwa kehilangan pengetahuan bisa terjadi bahkan dalam ilmu pengetahuan alam, dan oleh sebab itu sangat berguna untuk mempelajari tidak hanya publikasi terbaru di bidang seseorang tetapi juga tulisan-tulisan para penulis lama dan telah terlupakan. Benar adanya bahwa motif seperti kekuatan, prestise, pendapatan, permusuhan, dan persahabatan tidak akan kehilangan fungsi begitu orang beralih kepada studi tentang alam. (Misalnya, siapa yang siap untuk meninggalkan sebuah teori yang perkembangannya telah ia lakukan sepanjang hidupnya hanya karena dunia di sekitar semakin beralih ke paradigma lain yang tidak sesuai?) Benar, sebagai ekonom kita bisa melangkah lebih jauh lagi dan mengakui kemungkinan adanya kemunduran ilmiah: Proses dari konsumsi modal diikuti oleh standar hidup umum yang lebih rendah, populasi yang berkurang, disintegrasi pasar, dan pembagian tenaga kerja, seperti yang telah berulang kali terjadi dalam sejarah umat manusia, yang akan secara pasti mengakibatkan penurunan pengetahuan manusia terhadap alam.

Namun meski semua ini telah dikatakan, klaim rasionalisme tidaklah terpengaruh sedikit pun. Untuk satu hal, relativisme Kuhn dan Feyerabend secara pasti tidak bisa diperluas ke logika dan protofisika. Jika seseorang ingin membuat sebuah dalil yang berarti, atau pengukuran menyeluruh, "apa-apa" *tidak* jalan. Disiplin seperti itu yang notabene sebagian besar berada di luar lingkup pertimbangan Kuhn dan Feyerabend, *secara mutlak* sangat diperlukan untuk *setiap* ilmu pengetahuan alam secara empiris (dan bukan hanya paradigma yang tak terbantahkan yang bisa diganti oleh yang lain dan sesuatu yang tidak bisa dibandingkan). Bagaimanapun, sekali saja ini diakui, dan begitu dipahami bahwa pembuatan dalil, penghitungan, konstruksi instrumen pengukuran, dan pengukuran, yang kesemuanya membuat ilmu alam empiris menjadi mungkin adalah kegiatan yang disengaja, segera menjadi jelas bahwa paradigma ilmu alam harus dipahami sebagai sarana untuk mencapai tujuan manusia yang universal dan tak terpisahkan, serta bahwa hal tersebut harus sepadan dengan efisiensi mereka dalam mencapai tujuan ini.[^4]

[^4]: See on this also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “On Praxeology and the Praxeological Foundation of Epistemology and Ethics,” in Jeffrey Herbener, ed., *The Meaning of Ludwig von Mises* (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991).

The relativistic impression of the development of the empirical natural sciences that Kuhn and Feyerabend try to convey can be traced to the fact that they both misconceive of scientific theories as mere systems of verbal propositions and systematically ignore their foundation in the reality of action. Only if one regards theories as being completely detached from action does any single theory not only become immunizable, but any two rival theories whose respective terms cannot be reduced to and defined in terms of each other must then appear completely incommensurable so as to exclude any rational choice between them. However, this affects neither the refutability of any one theory, nor the commensurability of rival paradigms, on the entirely different level of applying them in the reality of action, of using them as instruments for the attainment of a practical purpose. On the level of mere words, paradigms may be irrefutable and incommensurable, but in practice they never can be. In fact, one could not even state that any single paradigm was irrefutable or any two paradigms were incommensurable and in what respect, unless one presupposed a common categorical framework that could serve as the basis for such an assessment or comparison. It is this *practical* refutability and commensurability of the paradigms of the empirical natural sciences that explains the possibility of technological progress.

In systematically ignoring the fact that theories and theoretically interpreted observations are those of an actor, built and made in order to act successfully, Kuhn and Feyerabend have deprived themselves of the very criterion against which all knowledge concerning nature is continually tested and commensurated: the criterion of successfully reaching a set goal by applying knowledge in a given situation, or of failing to do so. Without the criterion of instrumental success, relativism would be inescapable. Yet in each of our actions visà-vis nature, we confirm the claim of rationalism that one can identify a range of applications for some theoretical knowledge and test it for its success within this range, and hence, that competing theories must be considered commensurable as regards such ranges of application and success. No situation is conceivable in which it would be rational to give up an intellectual tool which had once proven successful in a range of applications if no better tool were available. Yet if a superior tool were available, for example, a theory or paradigm that allowed one to reach a goal that could not be reached equally successfully by applying another, incompatible theory, it would be irrational for an actor not to adopt it. To be sure, such irrational behavior is empirically possible. However, whoever chose it would have to pay a price for doing so. He would deprive himself of the ability to achieve goals that he otherwise could accomplish, and isolated from all social contexts which might offer other, socio-psychological reasons not to adopt it, alone vis-à-vis nature, no one capable of distinguishing between successful and unsuccessful action would ever want to pay such a price. It is this which explains the unacceptability of a relativist view of the natural sciences and the possibility of the actually observable continuous—if at times for socio-psychological reasons somewhat erratic—progress in man’s mastery of nature, which Kuhn and Feyerabend would declare nonexistent, although all the while it seems to be staring them in the face.[^5]

[^5]: See also Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1989): esp. 190–92; Wolfgang Stegmüller, *Hauptströmungen der Gegenartsphilosophie* (Stuttgart: Kröner, 1975), vol. 2, chap. 5, esp. pp. 523ff.

The situation is very different if one turns from the natural to the social sciences. Here the claims of rationalism seem to find far less support, and relativism has gained widespread public acceptance.[^6]

[^6]: See Martin Hollis and Steven Lukes, eds., *Rationality and Relativism* (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1982).

Foremost among the indicators cited in support of relativism is the observation that there is nothing in the development of the social sciences resembling the progress which has been achieved in the natural sciences. While our predictive powers and instrumental control over nature have dramatically increased since the times of Plato and Aristotle, the development of the empirical social sciences has been characterized by a standstill. In spite of the availability of all sorts of technical gadgets, such as high-speed computers, it appears that we are in no better position today to predict social events or to planfully bring about social change than were Plato or Aristotle in their days. (One might note that even if the validity of this observation is admitted, the relativistic conclusion to which it allegedly leads does not directly follow. It only follows if it is presupposed that the criteria for progress in the social sciences are indeed identical to those in the natural sciences. Proponents of social relativism take this for granted, yet it is by no means obvious why this should be so. On the contrary, in the natural sciences the object of knowledge [nature] and the subject of this knowledge [an actor] are different separate entities. In the social sciences, on the other hand, the objects of knowledge and research are themselves knowers and researchers. In light of this categorical difference, it would seem anything but clear why the methodology appropriate for the natural and the social sciences could possibly be one and the same. In fact, it is entirely unsurprising that when it comes to predicting predictors, or instrumentally controlling instrumental controllers, there *cannot* be any systematic progress of the kind observed in the natural sciences! [^7])

[^7]: See Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung. Untersuchungen zur Grundlegung von Soziologie und Ökonomie* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1983), esp. pp. 30–32; on methodological dualism see also Ludwig von Mises, *Human Action: A Treatise on Economics* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966), p. 18; idem, *Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985), pp. 1–2, 38–41; further, K.O. Apel, *Die Erklären: Verstehen Kontroverse in transzendental-pragmatischer Sicht* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1979).

Moreover, proponents of relativism usually point out, apparently there is no analogue in the social sciences to the role played by logic and protophysics as the a prioristic foundations of the empirical natural sciences. The rationalist claim, associated in particular with the “natural law” tradition, that such an analogue is provided by economics and ethics,[^8] has either been forgotten and disappeared from public consciousness or is dismissed out of hand: Economics, it is held, is an empirical science very much like physics, with the objective of producing predictive knowledge, but unlike physics it fails to deliver the promised goods. As regards the observation that prosperous as well as poor societies exist, which would seem to make room for economic explanations after all—though not for explanations of the kind offered by physics—the proponents of social relativism contend that such differences have no *economic* reasons but are due to different degrees of *technological* knowledge. Rich societies are rich because of their advanced state of technology; poverty is due to a lack of natural-scientific know-how. Two objections to this view appear obvious: (1) The description of the facts is false. Do not the underdeveloped societies send their future scientists and engineers in large numbers to the universities of the advanced countries, and do not these poor societies then have access to the *same* knowledge upon their return as the rich ones? (2) More important still, technological know-how can only have a material impact if it is utilized. However, in order to do this, there must be savings and investment. It is not the availability of technical or scientific knowledge that imposes limits on a society’s prosperity; rather, it is the amount of savings and investment that imposes limits on the exploitation of actually available knowledge and on scientific progress, insofar as research activities, too, must be supported by saved-up funds. Hence, contrary to relativistic views, economics seems to have something to do with prosperity and poverty after all! [^9]

[^8]: See Mises, *Theory and History*, pp. 44ff.

[^9]: See Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), p. 749.

Nor, it is claimed, does ethics offer support for anything but relativism, for does not the fact of continuous and, so it seems, ineradicable differences of opinion in the field of contemporary politics prove the case of ethical relativism conclusively? Does not social anthropology, the study of societies such as the Fidshi islanders, or the natives of New Guinea, for instance, add still more evidence in support of relativistic conclusions? There are institutions such as cannibalism or slavery which a relativist might be hard pressed to defend. However, according to ethical relativists, regarding these practices as counter-evidence is the result of a misconception. The problem with these institutions is not that they invalidate relativism but that societies adopting them are still under the spell of social rationalism. That is, they still falsely believe in an absolutely founded ethic. Ethical relativism, its proponents claim, rules out intolerant practices such as these and implies a pluralism of values. (But is it not obvious that this doctrine is entirely fallacious? Without an absolute, a priori foundation, a value pluralism is itself just another unfounded ideology, and there is no compelling reason to adopt it over any other one. Only if a priori valid reasons could be given for adopting pluralism could it claim to safeguard tolerance and could cannibalism or slavery then be ruled out as acceptable social practices.[^10])

[^10]: See Henry Veatch, *Rational Man: A Modern Interpretation of Aristotelian Ethics* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1962), esp. pp. 37–46; Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism,” pp. 84–85.
