## Kesalahan teori barang publik dan produksi keamanan

Di 1849, di saat liberalisme klasik masih kekuatan ideologis yang dominan dan "ekonom" dan "sosialis" umumnya dianggap Antonim, Gustave de Molinari, seorang ekonom Belgia yang terkenal, menulis,

> Jika ada satu kebenaran yang mapan dalam ekonomi politik, itu adalah ini: bahwa dalam semua kasus, dari semua komoditas yang melayani untuk kebutuhan berwujud konsumen, itu adalah kepentingan konsumen bahwa tenaga kerja dan perdagangan tetap gratis, karena kebebasan tenaga kerja dan perdagangan memiliki sebagai diperlukan dan permanen hasil maksimum pengurangan harga. Dan ini: bahwa kepentingan konsumen komoditi apapun harus selalu menang atas kepentingan produser. Sekarang, dalam mengejar prinsip-prinsip ini, salah satu tiba pada kesimpulan ini ketat: bahwa produksi keamanan harus kepentingan konsumen tidak berwujud komoditi tetap tunduk pada hukum persaingan bebas. Mana hal berikut: bahwa pemerintah tidak harus memiliki hak untuk mencegah lain pemerintah dari pergi ke kompetisi dengan itu, atau meminta konsumen keamanan datang secara eksklusif ke sana untuk komoditi ini. [^1]

Dia komentar pada seluruh argumen dengan mengatakan, "baik ini logis dan benar, atau lain prinsip-prinsip yang didasarkan ilmu ekonomi tidak sah." [^2]

Tampaknya ada hanya satu cara dari ini tidak menyenangkan (untuk semua sosialis, itulah) kesimpulan: berpendapat bahwa ada barang-barang tertentu yang untuk beberapa alasan khusus alasan ekonomi di atas tidak berlaku. Inilah yang disebut barang publik teori bertekad untuk membuktikan. [^3] Namun, saya akan menunjukkan bahwa sebenarnya tidak ada barang-barang khusus atau alasan khusus ada, dan bahwa produksi keamanan khususnya tidak menimbulkan masalah berbeda dari bahwa produksi lainnya baik atau jasa, baik itu rumah, keju, atau asuransi. Meskipun para pengikutnya banyak, teori barang seluruh publik adalah penalaran yang rusak, mencolok, penuh dengan inkonsistensi internal, bebas sequiturs, menarik bagi dan bermain populer prasangka dan keyakinan diasumsikan, tetapi dengan tidak berdasar ilmiah apapun. [^4]

Apa, kemudian, Apakah pelarian rute yang sosialis ekonom telah ditemukan untuk menghindari menggambar Molinari's kesimpulan terlihat seperti? Sejak Molinari's telah menjadi lebih umum untuk menjawab ya untuk pertanyaan apakah ada barang yang berbeda jenis analisis ekonomi berlaku. Sebagai soal fakta, ianya hampir mustahil untuk menemukan buku teks tunggal kontemporer ekonomi yang tidak menekankan pentingnya penting perbedaan antara barang-barang pribadi, yang adalah kebenaran mengenai keunggulan ekonomi Orde kapitalis produksi umumnya mengakui, dan publik barang, yang umumnya ditolak. [^5] Tertentu barang atau jasa (termasuk keamanan) dikatakan menjadi istimewa karena kesenangan mereka tidak dapat dibatasi untuk orang-orang yang benar-benar telah dibiayai produksi mereka. Sebaliknya, orang-orang yang tidak berpartisipasi dalam pembiayaan mereka juga menarik manfaat dari mereka. Barang-barang tersebut disebut barang publik atau layanan (dibandingkan dengan barang-barang pribadi atau layanan, yang secara eksklusif menguntungkan orang-orang yang benar-benar membayar untuk mereka). Karena fitur ini khusus barang publik, hal ini berpendapat, pasar tidak dapat menghasilkan mereka, atau setidaknya tidak dalam jumlah yang memadai atau kualitas; oleh karena itu, tindakan negara kompensasi diperlukan. [^6]

Contoh-contoh yang diberikan oleh penulis yang berbeda dari barang-barang publik yang diduga bervariasi. Penulis sering mengklasifikasikan sama baik atau layanan berbeda, meninggalkan hampir tidak ada klasifikasi tertentu baik tak terbantahkan, yang jelas memberi pertanda karakter ilusi seluruh perbedaan. [^7] Meskipun demikian, beberapa contoh yang menikmati status sangat populer sebagai barang publik adalah pemadam kebakaran yang berhenti tetangga rumah dari penangkapan api, dengan demikian membiarkan dia mengambil keuntungan dari saya pemadam kebakaran, meskipun dia tidak memberi kontribusi apa-apa untuk pembiayaan atau polisi yang, dengan berjalan di sekitar properti saya menakut-nakuti pergi pencuri potensi dari tetangga saya properti juga, bahkan jika ia tidak membantu membiayai patroli; atau mercusuar, sebuah contoh yang sangat sayang kepada ekonom, [^8] yang membantu kapal menemukan jalan meskipun pemilik kapal tidak berkontribusi sepeser pun untuk konstruksi atau pemeliharaan.

Sebelum melanjutkan dengan presentasi dan pemeriksaan kritis teori barang publik, saya akan menyelidiki bagaimana berguna perbedaan antara barang-barang pribadi dan umum yang membantu memutuskan apa yang harus diproduksi secara pribadi dan apa yang harus disediakan oleh negara atau dengan bantuan negara. Bahkan analisis yang paling dangkal tidak bisa gagal untuk menunjukkan bahwa menggunakan kriteria dugaan inexcludability, daripada menyajikan solusi yang masuk akal, akan mendapatkan satu ke dalam kesulitan. Meskipun setidaknya pada pandangan pertama tampaknya bahwa beberapa stateprovided barang dan Jasa memang layak sebagai barang publik, pastilah ini tidak jelas berapa banyak barang dan jasa yang sebenarnya diproduksi oleh Serikat bisa datang di bawah judul umum barang. Rel kereta api, kantor pos, telepon, jalan-jalan dan sejenisnya tampaknya menjadi barang penggunaan yang dapat dibatasi ke orang-orang yang benar-benar keuangan mereka, dan oleh karena itu muncul menjadi barang-barang pribadi. Dan sama tampaknya menjadi kasus mengenai berbagai aspek yang baik multidimensi "keamanan": segala sesuatu yang asuransi bisa dibawa keluar harus memenuhi syarat sebagai pribadi yang baik. Namun ini tidak cukup. Sama seperti banyak negara yang disediakan barang tampaknya barang pribadi, begitu banyak barang-barang pribadi diproduksi tampaknya cocok dalam kategori masyarakat. Jelas tetangga saya akan mendapatkan keuntungan dari kebun mawar wellkept saya — mereka bisa menikmati pemandangan itu tanpa pernah membantu saya taman. Hal yang sama juga berlaku untuk semua jenis perbaikan yang aku bisa membuat saya properti yang akan meningkatkan nilai properti juga tetangga. Bahkan orang-orang yang tidak membuang uang di topi dapat keuntungan dari musisi jalanan kinerja. -Sesama penumpang di bus yang tidak membantu saya membelinya keuntungan dari deodoran saya. Dan semua orang yang pernah bertemu saya akan mendapatkan keuntungan dari usaha saya, dilakukan tanpa dukungan keuangan mereka, untuk mengubah diri menjadi orang yang paling dicintai. Sekarang, melakukan semua barang-barang — naik gardens, perbaikan properti, jalan musik, deodoran, perbaikan pribadi — karena mereka jelas tampaknya memiliki karakteristik barang publik, maka harus disediakan oleh negara atau dengan bantuan negara?

Sebagai contoh-contoh ini dari swasta diproduksi umum barang menunjukkan, ada sesuatu yang tidak beres dengan tesis barang publik teori bahwa barang publik tidak dapat diproduksi secara pribadi, tetapi sebaliknya memerlukan intervensi negara. Jelas mereka dapat disediakan oleh pasar. Selain itu, bukti sejarah menunjukkan kepada kita bahwa semua barang umum disebut yang Serikat sekarang menyediakan beberapa saat di masa lalu benar-benar telah disediakan oleh pengusaha swasta atau bahkan hari ini jadi disediakan dalam satu negara atau yang lain. For example, the postal service was once private almost everywhere; streets were privately financed and still are sometimes; even the beloved lighthouses were originally the result of private enterprise;[^9] private police forces, detectives, and arbitrators exist; and help for the sick, the poor, the elderly, orphans, and widows has been a traditional concern of private charity organizations. To say, then, that such things cannot be produced by a pure market system is falsified by experience a hundredfold.

Apart from this, other difficulties arise when the public-private goods distinction is used to decide what and what not to leave to the market. For instance, what if the production of so-called public goods did not have positive but had negative consequences for other people, or if the consequences were positive for some and negative for others? What if the neighbor whose house was saved from burning by my fire brigade had wished (perhaps because he was overinsured) that it had burned down; or my neighbors hate roses, or my fellow passengers find the scent of my deodorant disgusting? In addition, changes in the technology can change the character of a given good. For example, with the development of cable TV a good that was formerly (seemingly) public has become private. And changes in the laws of property—of the appropriation of property—can have the very same effect of changing the public-private character of a good. The lighthouse, for instance, is a public good only insofar as the sea is publicly (not privately) owned. But if it were permitted to acquire pieces of the ocean as private property, as it would be in a purely capitalist social order, then as the lighthouse shines over only a limited territory, it would clearly become possible to exclude nonpayers from the enjoyment of its services.

Leaving this somewhat sketchy level of discussion and looking into the distinction between private and public goods more thoroughly, we discover that the distinction turns out to be completely illusory. A clear-cut dichotomy between private and public goods does not exist, and this is essentially why there can be so many disagreements on how to classify a given good. All goods are more or less private or public and can—and constantly do—change with respect to their degree of privateness/publicness as people’s values and evaluations change, and as changes occur in the composition of the population. In order to recognize that they never fall, once and for all, into either one or the other category, one must only recall what makes something a good. For something to be a good it must be recognized and treated as scarce by someone. Something is not a good as such, that is to say; goods are goods only in the eyes of the beholder. Nothing is a good unless at least one person subjectively evaluates it as such. But then, when goods are never goods-as-such—when no physico-chemical analysis can identify something as an economic good—there is clearly no fixed, objective criterion for classifying goods as either private or public. They can never be private or public goods as such. Their private or public character depends on how few or how many people consider them to be goods, with the degree to which they are private or public changing as these evaluations change and range from one to infinity. Even seemingly completely private things like the interior of my apartment or the color of my underwear can thus become public goods as soon as somebody else starts caring about them.[^10] And seemingly public goods, like the exterior of my house or the color of my overalls, can become extremely private goods as soon as other people stop caring about them. Moreover, every good can change its characteristics again and again; it can even turn from a public or private good to a public or private bad or evil and vice versa, depending solely on the changes in this caring or uncaring. If this is so, then no decision whatsoever can be based on the classification of goods as private or public.[^11] In fact, to do so it would become necessary to ask virtually every individual with respect to every single good whether or not he happened to care about it—positively or negatively and perhaps to what extent—in order to determine who might profit from what and who should therefore participate in the good’s financing. (And how could one know if they were telling the truth?) It would also become necessary to monitor all changes in such evaluations continuously, with the result that no definite decision could ever be made regarding the production of anything, and as a consequence of a nonsensical theory all of us would be long dead.[^12]

But even if one were to ignore all these difficulties and were willing to admit, for the sake of argument that the private-public good distinction does hold water, the argument would not prove what it is supposed to. It neither provides conclusive reasons why public goods—assuming that they exist as a separate category of goods—should be produced at all, nor why the state rather than private enterprises should produce them. This is what the theory of public goods essentially says, having introduced the aforementioned conceptual distinction: The positive effects of public goods for people who do not contribute anything to their production or financing proves that these goods are desirable. But evidently they would not be produced, or at least not in sufficient quantity and quality, in a free, competitive market, since not all of those who would profit from their production would also contribute financially to make the production possible. In order to produce these goods (which are evidently desirable, but would not be produced otherwise), the state must jump in and assist in their production. This sort of reasoning, which can be found in almost every textbook on economics (Nobel laureates not excluded)[^13] is completely fallacious on two counts.

For one thing, to come to the conclusion that the state has to provide public goods that otherwise would not be produced, one must smuggle a norm into one’s chain of reasoning. Otherwise, from the statement that because of some special characteristics they have, certain goods would not be produced, one could never reach the conclusion that these goods *should* be produced. But with a norm required to justify their conclusion, the public goods theorists clearly have left the bounds of economics as a positive, *wertfrei* science. Instead they have moved into the realm of morals or ethics, and hence one would expect to be offered a theory of ethics as a cognitive discipline in order for them to do legitimately what they are doing and to justifiably derive their conclusion. But it can hardly be stressed enough that nowhere in public goods theory literature can anything that even faintly resembles such a cognitive theory of ethics be found.[^14] Thus it must be stated at the outset, that public goods theorists are misusing whatever prestige they might have as positive economists for pronouncements on matters on which, as their own writings indicate, they have no authority whatsoever. Perhaps, though, they have stumbled on something correct by accident, without having supported it with an elaborate moral theory? It becomes apparent that nothing could be further from the truth as soon as one explicitly formulates the norm that would be needed to arrive at the conclusion that the state has to assist in the provision of public goods. The norm required to reach the above conclusion is this: whenever one can somehow prove that the production of a particular good or service has a positive effect on someone else but would not be produced at all or would not be produced in a definite quantity or quality unless certain people participated in its financing, then the use of aggressive violence against these persons is allowed, either directly or indirectly with the help of the state, and these persons may be forced to share in the necessary financial burden. It does not need much comment to show that chaos would result from implementing this rule, as it amounts to saying that anyone can attack anyone else whenever he feels like it. Moreover, as I have demonstrated in detail elsewhere[^15] this norm could never be justified as a fair norm. To argue so, in fact to argue at all, in favor of or against anything, be it a moral, nonmoral, empirical, or logico-analytical position, it must be presupposed that contrary to what the norm actually says, each individual’s integrity as a physically independent decision-making unit is assured. For only if everyone is free from physical aggression by everyone else could anything first be said and then agreement or disagreement on anything possibly be reached. The principle of nonaggression is thus the necessary precondition for argumentation and possible agreement and hence can be argumentatively defended as a just norm by means of a priori reasoning.

[^1]: Gustave de Molinari, *The Production of Security*, trans. J. Huston McCulloch (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 2, 1977), p. 3.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 4.

[^3]: For various approaches of public goods theorists, see James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962); James M. Buchanan, *The Public Finances* (Homewood, Ill.: Richard Irwin, 1970); idem, *The Limits of Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975); Gordon Tullock, *Private Wants, Public Means* (New York: Basic Books, 1970); Mancur Olson, *The Logic of Collective Action* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965); William J. Baumol, *Welfare Economics and the Theory of the State* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1952).

[^4]: See on the following, Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), pp. 883ff.; idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (1981); Walter Block, “Free Market Transportation: Denationalizing the Roads,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979); idem, “Public Goods and Externalities: The Case of Roads,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 7, no. 1 (1983).

[^5]: See for instance, William J. Baumol and Alan S. Blinder, *Economics, Principles and Policy* (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1979), chap. 31.

[^6]: Another frequently used criterion for public goods is that of “nonrivalrous consumption.” Generally, both criteria seem to coincide: When free riders cannot be excluded, nonrivalrous consumption is possible; and when they can be excluded, consumption becomes rivalrous, or so it seems. However, as public goods theorists argue, this coincidence is not perfect. It is, they say, conceivable that while the exclusion of free riders might be possible, their inclusion might not be connected with any additional cost (the marginal cost of admitting free riders is zero, that is), and that the consumption of the good in question by the additionally admitted free rider will not necessarily lead to a subtraction in the consumption of the good available to others. Such a good would be a public good, too. And since exclusion would be practiced on the free market and the good would not become available for nonrivalrous consumption to everyone it otherwise could—even though this would require no additional costs—this, according to statist-socialist logic, would prove a market failure, i.e., a suboptimal level of consumption. Hence the state would have to take over the provision of such goods. (A movie theater, for instance, might be only half full, so it might be “costless” to admit additional viewers free of charge, and their watching the movie also might not affect the paying viewers; hence the movie would qualify as a public good. Since, however, the owner of the theater would be engaging in exclusion, instead of letting free riders enjoy a “costless” performance, movie theaters would be ripe for nationalization.) On the numerous fallacies involved in defining public goods in terms of nonrivalrous consumption see notes 12 and 17 below.

[^7]: On this subject Walter Block, “Public Goods and Externalities.”

[^8]: See for instance Buchanan, *The Public Finances*, p. 23; Paul Samuelson, *Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), p. 166.

[^9]: See Ronald Coase, “The Lighthouse in Economics,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 17 (1974).

[^10]: See, for instance, the ironic case that Block makes for socks being public goods in “Public Goods and Externalities.”

[^11]: To avoid any misunderstanding here, every single producer and every association of producers making joint decisions can, at any time, decide whether or not to produce a good based on an evaluation of the privateness or publicness of the good. In fact, decisions on whether or not to produce public goods privately are constantly made within the framework of a market economy. What is impossible is to decide whether or not to ignore the outcome of the operation of a free market based on the assessment of the degree of privateness or publicness of a good.

[^12]: In fact, then, the introduction of the distinction between private and public goods is a relapse into the pre-subjectivist era of economics. From the point of view of subjectivist economics, no good exists that can be categorized objectively as private or public. This is essentially why the second proposed criterion for public goods—permitting nonrivalrous consumption (see note 6 above)—breaks down too. For how could any outside observer determine whether or not the admittance of an additional free rider at no charge would not indeed lead to a subtraction in the consumption of a good to others? Clearly there is no way that he could objectively do so. In fact, it might well be that one’s enjoyment of a movie or of driving on a road would be considerably reduced if more people were allowed in the theater or on the road. Again, to find out whether or not this is the case one would have to ask every individual—and not everyone might agree (what then?). Furthermore, since even a good that allows nonrivalrous consumption is not a free good, as a consequence of admitting additional free riders “crowding” would eventually occur, and hence everyone would have to be asked about the appropriate “margin.” In addition, my consumption may or may not be affected depending on who it is that is admitted free of charge, so I would have to be asked about this, too. And finally, everyone might change his opinion on all of these questions over time. It is thus in the same way impossible to decide whether or not a good is a candidate for state (rather than private) production based on the criterion of nonrivalrous consumption as on that of nonexcludability (see also note 17 below).

[^13]: See Paul Samuelson, “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” *Review of Economics and Statistics* (1954); idem, *Economics*, chap. 8; Milton Friedman, *Capitalism and Freedom* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), chap. 2; F.A. Hayek, *Law, Legislation and Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1979), vol. 3, chap. 14.

[^14]: Economists in recent years, particularly the Chicago School, have been increasingly concerned with the analysis of property rights. Harold Demsetz, “The Exchange and Enforcement of Property Rights,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 7 (1964); idem, “Toward a Theory of Property Rights,” *American Economic Review* (1967); Ronald Coase, “The Problem of Social Cost,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 3 (1960); Armen Alchian, *Economic Forces at Work* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1977), part 2; Richard Posner, *Economic Analysis of the Law* (Boston: Brown, 1977). Such analyses, however, have nothing to do with ethics. On the contrary, they represent attempts to substitute economic efficiency considerations for the establishment of justifiable ethical principles [on the critique of such endeavors see Murray N. Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982), chap. 26; Walter Block, “Coase and Demsetz on Private Property Rights,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977); Ronald Dworkin, “Is Wealth a Value,” *Journal of Legal Studies* 9 (1980); Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Efficiency,” in Mario Rizzo, ed., *Time Uncertainty and Disequilibrium* (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1979). Ultimately, all efficiency arguments are irrelevant because there simply exists no nonarbitrary way of measuring, weighing, and aggregating individual utilities or disutilities that result from some given allocation of property rights. Hence any attempt to recommend some particular system of assigning property rights in terms of its alleged maximization of “social welfare” is pseudo-scientific humbug. See in particular, Murray N. Rothbard, *Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 3, 1977); also Lionel Robbins, “Economics and Political Economy,” *American Economic Review* (1981).

The “Unanimity Principle” which Buchanan and Tullock, following Knut Wicksell (*Finanztheoretische Untersuchungen*, Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1896), have repeatedly proposed as a guide for economic policy is also not to be confused with an ethical principle proper. According to this principle only such policy changes should be enacted which can find unanimous consent—and that surely sounds attractive; but then, *mutatis mutandis*, it also determines that the status quo be preserved if there is less than unanimous agreement on any proposal of change—and that sounds far less attractive, because it implies that any given, present state of affairs regarding the allocation of property rights must be legitimate either as a point of departure or as a to-be-continued-state. However, the public choice theorists offer no justification in terms of a normative theory of property rights for this daring claim as would be required. Hence, the unanimity principle is ultimately without ethical foundation. In fact, because it would legitimize any conceivable status quo, the Buchananites’ most favored principle is no less than outrightly absurd as a moral criterion. See on this also Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty* chap. 26; idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” pp. 549f.

Whatever might still be left for the unanimity principle, Buchanan and Tullock, following the lead of Wicksell again, then give away by reducing it in effect to one of “relative” or “quasi” unanimity.

[^15]: Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “From the Economics of Laissez Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); infra chap. 8.