Jawabannya tergantung pada apakah preferensi preferensi untuk layanan perbankan cadangan pecahan, yaitu masalah dan penerimaan media fidusia, hanya melibatkan properti milik kedua pihak yang melakukan kontrak. Pada suatu waktu tertentu, jumlah barang (barang yang disesuaikan) - apakah barang konsumsi, barang produsen, atau uang - diberikan. Perbankan cadangan pecahan tidak meningkatkan jumlah properti yang ada (uang atau lainnya), juga tidak mentransfer properti yang ada dari satu pihak ke pihak lain. Melainkan, ini melibatkan produksi dan penjualan sejumlah besar judul ke persediaan properti uang (emas) yang tidak berubah; yaitu, pasokan dan permintaan uang palsu dan perampasan yang tidak sah. Seperti dalam kasus pemalsuan lainnya (pemalsuan) - sertifikat saham dan komoditas, uang kertas, sertifikat tanah, seni asli, dan lain-lain - penerbitan dan penjualan salinan uang (uang kertas) yang ditemukan oleh barang asli (emas) secara fisik akan berkurang atau dirampas harta benda asli, komoditas, tanah, atau properti pemilik-seni. Tapi pemalsuan uang sangat berbahaya dan berbahaya karena karakteristik penentu uang sebagai barang yang paling mudah laku dan dapat diterima secara luas dari semua barang; Artinya, karena * uang </ 0> -pounterfeits terbuka untuk penjual mereka seluas mungkin objek untuk penggunaan yang tidak semestinya (dari uang ke hampir semua bentuk properti nyata lainnya).</p> 

Dengan demikian, tak mengherankan jika dari semua bentuk pemalsuan, pemalsuan uang selalu memegang daya tarik terbesar. Selama uang ada juga akan ada permintaan uang palsu yang terus-menerus. Terlepas dari daya tarik dan permintaan ini, bagaimanapun, tidak ada yang salah dengan larangan selimut terhadap cadangan cadangan fraksi. Tidak ada yang bisa mengoperasikan bank cadangan pecahan karena alasan yang sama bahwa tidak seorang pun, dalam bidang usaha lainnya, dapat melakukan pemalsuan, yaitu produksi dan penjualan judul atau fotokopi ke properti atau aslinya yang tidak ada. Di pengadilan, cukup uang tunggal atau pemilik properti lainnya membawa tuntutan terhadap bank cadangan pecahan sebagai produsen uang palsu, dan bank tersebut segera harus menghentikan operasinya saat ini dan dikurangi menjadi dua dokumen aslinya. fungsi: deposito dan pinjaman. Deposito yang menghasilkan bunga (bukan biaya-biaya) adalah kontradiksi dalam hal: ini adalah gudang uang palsu, dan harus dilarang, terlepas dari manfaat yang diperoleh dari deposan, peminjam, dan pemilik bank. Untuk melakukannya bukan pembatasan kebebasan kontrak di pasar untuk layanan perbankan, namun kebutuhan uang dan perbankan yang sah. Setiap orang yang memasukkan uang atau sumber daya lainnya ke rekening simpanan dengan hasil bunga terlibat dalam perampasan yang tidak semestinya dan tidak sah. <sup id="fnref:24"><a href="#fn:24" class="footnote-ref"> 1 </ 0></p> 

<p>
  Hubungan antara negara bagian dan bank cadangan fraksional bahkan lebih intim, dan bagaimanapun juga berbeda dari yang disarankan oleh Selgin and White. Mereka mengklaim bahwa hal itu akan menjadi gangguan yang tidak sah dengan pengoperasian pasar bebas jika negara tersebut melarang perbankan cadangan pecahan. Faktanya, perbankan cadangan pecahan adalah akibat dari campur tangan negara yang tidak sah terhadap pasar, dan melarangnya hanya akan memperbaiki intervensi sebelumnya. Selgin dan White menyadari bahwa dalam evolusi sistem perbankan bebas, perbankan dengan cadangan 100 persen dan, yang dipisahkan secara fungsional, perbankan pinjaman, harus (praxeologis) mendahului perbankan cadangan pecahan. Dalam pandangan mereka, perbankan cadangan pecahan adalah hasil alami dari sistem cadangan 100 persen sebelumnya. Namun, mereka tidak menawarkan penjelasan untuk transisi ini sebagai solusi alami untuk sebuah masalah yang tidak dapat dipecahkan di bawah sistem perbankan 100 persen sebelumnya (seperti cara orang Austria menganggap uang sebagai solusi alami untuk masalah kurang kebetulan dari keinginan di bawah sistem barter sebelumnya). Mereka hanya menegaskan bahwa transisi sebenarnya terjadi.
</p>

<p>
  Sementara orang dapat dengan mudah melihat mengapa dan bagaimana seorang bankir mungkin ingin memanfaatkan kemungkinan pemalsuan, sama jelasnya bahwa usaha semacam itu tidak akan berjalan tanpa cepat dan terus-menerus ditantang. Tentunya penulis dan ribuan teoretikus hukum dan ekonomi saat ini akan menuduh bank pemalsuan retribusi palsu dan akan mengajukan tuntutan terhadap mereka. Jalannya perkembangan evolusi perbankan selanjutnya akan bergantung pada keputusan pengadilan. Jika pengadilan memutuskan bahwa masalah media fidusia <em> qua </ 0> judul untuk uang ditemukan oleh uang merupakan pemalsuan, pecahan bank cadangan tidak akan datang menjadi ada; dan hanya jika memutuskan sebaliknya apakah mereka benar-benar akan muncul. Tidak ada satu pun evolusi ini yang alami; semuanya tampak agak disengaja. Juga tidak akan hasil dari uji coba tersebut secara alami sesuai dengan keinginan Selgin dan White. Sebaliknya, jika seseorang berasumsi bahwa bankir cadangan pecahan akan diadili atas tuduhan pemalsuan di hadapan dewan juri dari rekan mereka sendiri (pengusaha lain), kami berani mengatakan bahwa, secara empiris, jumlah kasus yang demikian akan berakhir dengan keyakinan ( kesaksian Selgin dan White meskipun). Mengapa, kemudian, dominasi perbankan cadangan pecahan yang hampir lengkap?</p> 
  
  <p>
    Jawabannya adalah bahwa pengadilan yang memutuskan masalah ini di mana-mana adalah pengadilan negeri. Only if a single court possesses a territorial monopoly of jurisdiction is it possible that the dispute at hand could be settled once and for all. And that it has been uniformly settled in the way it was, that is, by permitting rather than prohibiting fractional reserve banking, follows from the interest of every court and judge <em>qua</em> state court and state judge. The owners and agents of the state recognize fully as much as bankers the potentials of money counterfeiting as a source of income. In permitting bankers to issue fiduciary media (rather than prohibiting the practice as counterfeiting), banks are made existentially dependent on the state. They can only operate because the state, due to its territorial monopoly of jurisdiction, shields them from counterfeiting suits; and the state does so only under the provision that banks will share with it in the extra revenue and credit derived from legalized counterfeiting. Hence, by permitting fractional reserve free banking the state actually creates the first and preliminary form of a joint-bank-state-counterfeiting cartel under its own ultimate control.
  </p>
  
  <p>
    Once fractional reserve banking receives blanket protection from the state, it follows naturally that fractional reserve banks will outcompete 100 percent reserve banks. Not, as Selgin and White<fnref target="25" /> assert, because they are better or more efficient banks, but for the reason that, once money counterfeiting is permitted, banks that engage in it tend to outcompete banks that do not. That is, for the same reason that, once industrial air pollution is permitted a polluting steel producer will tend to outcompete a steel producer who does not pollute, and for the same reason that a protection agency with taxing powers, a state, will tend to outcompete protectors without taxing power. Put differently, it is not always the case that good drives out bad. This is the case only so long as private property rights are inviolate. If they are not, and there exist privileged agents or agencies, who are exempt from the universal rules regarding the appropriation, production and transfer of property, then these will tend to outcompete other normal agents. In this case, bad drives out good. Thus, it is completely mistaken to interpret the empirical success of fractional reserve banking as proof of its greater economic efficiency. The success of fractional over 100 percent deposit banking is no more a market phenomenon than is the success of tax-yielding protectors, states, over competitive and nontaxing security producers. It is false to suggest, as Selgin and White do, that fractional reserve banking has stood the market test and represents the outcome of voluntary consumer choices. After all, 100-percent-reserve-deposit banking is not outlawed and consumers are free to bank with them instead of fractional banks if they so prefer. Or would they likewise argue that the polluting steel producer had stood the test of the market because, after all, consumers are free to buy their steel from nonpolluting steel producers, or that states have proven themselves in the market because, after all, consumers are free to buy their security also from agencies without any tax and jurisdictional powers?<fnref target="26" />
  </p>
  
  <p>
    Moreover, whereas 100-percent-reserve banking is crisis-proof, fractional reserve banking, as even Selgin and White admit, is not in fact, as we can only briefly indicate here. A system of free fractional reserve banking will, in accordance with Mises’s theory of interventionism, lead to further state interventions and the successive devolution of money. Free fractional reserve banking <em>qua</em> state-protected competition in counterfeiting will lead to a steady contest among banks of testing the viability of increasingly lower reserve ratios. This is bound to lead to banking crises, and these will be used by governments for the introduction of central banking. Central banking leads to still more counterfeiting, and to the abolition of commodity money and adoption of national fiat currencies. Lastly, international—inter-central bank—competition in fiat money counterfeiting will lead to state bankruptcies, and their financial default will be used by the most powerful among the surviving states for the establishment of a one-world government, central bank, and fiat currency.
  </p>
  
  <p>
    Hence, the solution proposed by Selgin and White to the current monetary disorder, that is, a gold-based free—fractional reserve—banking system, is in fact the initial interventionist cause of virtually all contemporary monetary problems.<fnref target="27" />
  </p>
  
  <footnotes>
    <fn name="24">
      <p>
        Explains Rothbard:
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          The champions of free competition in counterfeiting retort that this is simply the market at work, that the market registers a “demand” for more expanded credit, and that the private bankers, those Kirznerian entrepreneurs, are simply “alert” to such market demands. Well, of course, there is always a “demand” for fraud, and embezzlement, on the market, and there will always be plenty of “alert” swindlers who are eager and willing to furnish a supply of these items. But if we define the “market” not simply as a supply of desired goods and services, but as a supply of such goods <em>within a</em> framework of inviolate property rights, then we see a very different picture. (“The Present State of Austrian Economics,” <em>Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines</em> 6, no. 2, [1995]: 77)
        </p>
      </blockquote>
    </fn>
    
    <fn name="25">
      <p>
        Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 97–98.
      </p>
    </fn>
    
    <fn name="26">
      <p>
        A similar confusion characterizes Selgin and White’s view on the relationship between money proper (gold) and banknotes. They criticize Hoppe for claiming that, in a genuine free-market order, most people would use money proper rather than banknotes (without mentioning Hoppe’s theoretical reason). “The facts,” they claim, “are otherwise” (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 99). Yet these facts—the historical success of the banknote over genuine money—are <em>the result of an earlier state interference</em> with private-property rights (the legalization of fractional reserve banking). As Ludwig von Mises noted,
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          [t]he truth is that, except for small groups of businessmen who were able to distinguish between good and bad banks, bank notes were always looked upon with distrust. It was the special charters which governments granted to privileged banks that slowly made these suspicions disappear. (p. 438)
        </p>
        
        <p>
          In [governments’] eyes the foremost task of the banks was to lend money to the treasury. The money-substitutes were favorably considered as pace-makers for government-issued paper money. The convertible banknote was merely a first step on the way to the nonredeemable banknote. With the progress of statolatry and the policy of interventionism these ideas have become general and are no longer questioned by anybody. (p. 442)
        </p>
        
        <p>
          Governments did not foster the use of bank notes in order to avoid inconvenience to ladies shopping. Their idea was to lower the rate of interest and to open a source of cheap credit to their treasuries. In their eyes the increase in the quantity of fiduciary media was a means of promoting welfare. Banknotes are not indispensable. All the economic achievements of capitalism would have been accomplished if they had never existed. (<em>Human Action: A Treatise on Economics</em>, 3rd rev. ed. [Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1966], p. 447)
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        Accordingly, Mises’s view regarding sound money is completely different from Selgin and White’s. Whereas the latter believe that gold would—and should—ultimately disappear from circulation altogether (see note 3 above), Mises considered it a requirement of a sound monetary system that
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          [g]old must be in the cash holdings of everybody. Everybody must see gold coins changing hands, must be used to having gold coins in his pockets, to receiving gold coins when he cashes his pay check, and to spending gold coins when he buys in a store. (<em>The Theory of Money and Credit</em>, pp. 450–51)
        </p>
      </blockquote>
    </fn>
    
    <fn name="27">
      <p>
        On the relationship between state money and banking and political centralization see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Banking, Nation States, and International Politics,” <em>Review of Austrian Economics</em> 4 (1990): 55–87; and Jörg Guido Hülsmann, “Banking and Political Centralization,” <em>Journal of Libertarian Studies</em> 13, no. 1 (1997). Selgin and White argue:
      </p>
      
      <blockquote>
        <p>
          We also reject the notion … that <em>competitive</em> banks issuing redeemable liabilities can create credit “out of thin air.” By the nature of the balance sheet, all bank loans must be funded by liabilities or equity. Neither source of funds can be conjured out of thin air. No one is forced to hold a competitive bank’s redeemable liabilities or to buy its shares; anyone can hold claims on other banks instead, or on no bank. A competitive bank must therefore <em>expend real resources to attract a clientele</em> by the provision of interest and services. The notion that a bank can extend credit … gratuitously is valid only with respect to the inframarginal credits of a monopoly bank, or to [the] issuer of a forced tender; it does not apply to a bank in a competitive system. (p. 94, n. 13)
        </p>
        
        <p>
          Thus competition will beat down the returns to capital invested in fractional-reserve banking until the marginal bank is earning only the normal rate of return. (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 97)
        </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      <p>
        While we have no difficulty accepting the distinction drawn here between competitive and monopolistic banking, none of this has any bearing on the issue at hand, that is, the validity of the analogy between states and fractional reserve banks as outlaw organizations. For one, states have to compete for clients (residents). Indeed, competition between states (or banks) for clients only comes to a complete halt with the establishment of a single world state (or central bank). And the intra-state competition between fractional reserve banks is, as explained, competition within a state-privileged industry; that is, monopolistic competition (just as inter-state competition is an example of monopolistic competition). Second and more importantly, the difference between competitive and monopolistic banks (or states), interesting as it may otherwise be, does not affect in the slightest their common characteristic as fractional reserve banks (or states). Counterfeiting and taxation do not change their nature because they are undertaken competitively.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        The error can be revealed by analogy. Selgin and White are paraphrased here: We also reject the notion that competitive states issuing tax liabilities can create taxes out of thin air. By the nature of state budgets all expenditures must be funded by conquest, robbery, or theft. Neither source of funds can be conjured out of thin air. No one is forced to hold any particular state’s tax liabilities or buy its shares; anyone can move and pay taxes to another state, or to no state. A competitive state must therefore <em>expend real resources</em> to attract a clientele by the provision of protection and services. The notion that a state can increase taxes gratuitously is valid only with respect to the inframarginal taxes of a monopoly state; it does not apply to a state in a competitive system. Thus, competition will beat down the returns to capital invested in states until the marginal state is earning only the normal rate of return.
      </p>
      
      <p>
        According to Selgin and White, it would seem to follow that taxation (like money counterfeiting) is not to be considered a problem until the arrival of a single world monopoly bank. Up until then, under competitive conditions, taxes represent nothing but a normal market income.
      </p>
    </fn>
  </footnotes>