### Masalah penipuan II: pecahan cadangan perbankan dan kebebasan kontrak

Murray Rothbard's klasifikasi pecahan cadangan perbankan seperti penipuan adalah hasil dari panjang dan intensif belajar etika dan hak milik teori khususnya. Selgin dan putih benar menganggap ekonomi sebagai intelektual independen dan terpisah dari etika. Ini mungkin dipelajari tanpa pengetahuan sebelumnya dari teori properti dan hak milik. Namun mereka jangan ragu untuk membuat pernyataan etis menyapu. Dalam pertahanan mereka moral cadangan fraksional perbankan Selgin dan putih jarang menyebutkan properti, apalagi menjelaskan teori properti. Ini hasil dalam serangkaian kesalahan mendasar dan masalah: kebingungan tentang perbedaan antara properti dan properti judul; kebingungan mengenai (im-) kemungkinan sesuatu (properti) yang dimiliki secara bersamaan oleh lebih dari satu pemilik; kebingungan mengenai prioritas Logis properti dan properti teori vis-à-vis kontrak dan teori kontrak; dan kebingungan mengenai perlunya memenuhi kewajiban kontrak dengan properti sendiri (bukan hanya siapa pun).

Kesulitan-kesulitan ini masuk ke dalam diskusi para penulis isu "kemerdekaan kontrak". Argumen mereka sangatlah mudah.

> If a bank does not represent or expressly oblige itself to hold 100 percent reserves, then fractional reserves do not violate the contractual agreement between the bank and its customer…. Melarang sukarela perjanjian kontrak yang mengizinkan pecahan cadangan memegang adalah intervensi ke pasar, pembatasan kebebasan kontrak yang merupakan aspek penting dari hak milik pribadi. [^14]

Bagian ini menunjukkan sekali lagi Selgin dan White sudah dicatat ultra subjektif. Menurut pandangan ini, itu adalah Perjanjian sukarela yang membuat — merupakan dan menentukan — kontrak yang berlaku. Namun, kontrak yang berlaku adalah perjanjian mengenai transfer properti riil; oleh karena itu, berbagai kontrak yang berlaku sebenarnya pertama dan terutama dibatasi oleh sifat hal-hal dan properti (dan hanya kemudian oleh perjanjian). It was thus that Hoppe (p. 70) menjelaskan bahwa

> Freedom of contract does not imply that *every* mutually advantageous contract should be permitted…. Kebebasan kontrak berarti sebaliknya bahwa A dan B harus diperbolehkan untuk membuat kontrak apapun *mengenai properti mereka sendiri*, namun pecahan cadangan perbankan melibatkan pembuatan kontrak mengenai milik pihak ketiga. [^15]

Selgin dan putih merujuk kepada biaya ini agak menyesatkan sebagai "pihak ketiga efek" dan kontra dengan pengisian Hoppe pada gilirannya dengan dasar kebingungan mengenai sifat properti dan hak milik. Mereka menyatakan pertama, bahwa

> spill-overs from others’ actions to the *value* of C’s property … are an inescapable free-market phenomenon and not a violation of C’s private-property rights, [whereas] *physical invasions* of C’s property … are of course inconsistent with the protection of C’s property rights. Itu harus jelas bahwa jika A dan B untuk dilarang dari setiap transaksi yang hanya mempengaruhi *nilai pasar* harta-benda C, tanpa setiap agresi fisik atau ancaman terhadap C atau C sah properti, maka prinsip-prinsip properti pribadi, kebebasan kontrak, dan persaingan pasar bebas sepenuhnya dihapuskan. Apakah B dilarang menawarkan untuk menjual compact disc rekaman ke A, hanya karena melakukan sehingga mengurangi nilai pasar C persediaan catatan vinil? [^16]

Kedua, mereka menyatakan bahwa pengurangan daya beli uang, yang mereka mengakui harus hasil dari setiap masalah fidusia media, seperti nilai-efek yang berbahaya dan dengan demikian "menyediakan ada pembenaran untuk secara legal pembatas bank tindakan." Maka mereka menyimpulkan bahwa argumen Hoppe's "tidak valid" (dan bertentangan dengan teori Rothbard's properti).

Argumen Selgin dan putih yang berisi dua kesalahan. Pertama, sementara premis Mayor sudah benar, itu palsu bahwa Hoppe keliru tentang hal itu. Hoppe telah menulisnya secara teori hak milik, dan ini tidak hanya menyadari perbedaan yang disebutkan oleh Selgin dan putih tapi bahkan menyediakan pertahanan praxeological oleh karena itu, dalam hal ini menganggap ada perbedaan penghakiman apapun antara Rothbard dan Hoppe ada. [^17]

Kedua, premis minor terbukti palsu (dan karenanya, jadi adalah kesimpulan). Selgin dan putih mengklaim bahwa penurunan daya beli uang yang dihasilkan dari masalah fidusia media adalah acara semacam berbahaya yang sama sebagai penurunan harga apa pun (yang disebabkan oleh perubahan dalam pasokan dan/atau permintaan). Bahwa pemilik uang kehilangan daya beli hasil pecahan cadangan perbankan, mereka mengklaim, ini tidak berbeda dari situasi di mana pemilik kentang atau mobil menderita penurunan nilai persediaan yang lebih besar atau permintaan untuk kentang dan mobil.

Di sini lagi, Selgin dan putih conflate uang (emas) — yaitu properti- dan uang pengganti (uang kertas) — yaitu properti judul. Yang pasti, masalah fidusia media tidak mengakibatkan kerusakan fisik properti riil. Setelah semua, adalah hanya selembar kertas, dan kertas tidak mengerahkan efek fisik yang relevan pada dunia luar. Tetapi yang sama dapat dikatakan juga tentang masalah fidusia judul untuk kentang atau mobil (judul didukung oleh aset selain kentang atau mobil). Mereka, terlalu, adalah hanya potongan-potongan kertas, dan dengan demikian tidak berdampak pada dunia nyata. Belum ada sebuah perbedaan penting antara perubahan dalam kentang atau kekayaan pemilik mobil posisi karena perubahan dalam pasokan atau permintaan untuk kentang atau mobil di satu sisi, dan perubahan yang dibawa oleh perubahan dalam penawaran atau permintaan untuk judul untuk nonexisting ( tidak berubah) jumlah kentang atau mobil di sisi lain. Tapi, pemilik kentang atau mobil yang terkena berbeda dalam kedua kasus. Dalam kasus pertama, jika harga kentang atau mobil jatuh karena lebih besar kentang atau pasokan Mobil, semua pemilik kentang atau mobil saat ini tetap (unchangingly) memiliki kuantitas yang sama properti (kentang atau mobil). No one’s physical property is diminished. Likewise, if the price falls because potato or car buyers are willing to offer only lesser quantities of other goods in exchange for potatoes or cars, this by itself has no effect on any current potato or car owner’s physical quantity of potatoes or cars. In distinct contrast in the second case, the issue and sale of an additional title to an unchanged quantity of potatoes or cars *does* lead to a quantitative diminution of some current potato or car owner’s physical property. It does not merely have a value-effect: the purchasing power of potato or car titles will fall. It does have a physical effect: the issuer and seller of fiduciary potato or car titles misappropriates other people’s potatoes or cars. He appropriates other people’s property without relinquishing any property of his own (in exchange for an empty property title).[^18]

### The Issue of Fraud III: The "Proof from Existence" Fractional Reserve Banking and State

Neither the title-transfer theory of contract nor the principle of freedom of contract supports the claim that the issue of fiduciary media and fractional reserve banking is ethically justified. To the contrary, only one other argument remains in support of the claim that fractional reserve banking represents a legitimate form of business.

The argument boils down to a proof from existence: X, Y, or Z exists; it would not exist if it were not beneficial; hence, it should exist (and outlawing it would be detrimental and morally wrong).

Thus, write Selgin and White:

> the group [of people] whose freedom of contract we are concerned with here is not a small eccentric bunch, but is the great mass of people who have demonstrated that they do prefer banks that operate on fractional reserves…. Depositors continue to patronize these banks, demonstrating their preference, for them.[^19]
> 
> … By the principle of demonstrated preference depositors must be presumed to benefit from the package they have agreed to accept, risk and all.[^20]
> 
> \[Consequently,\] \[if\] *any* person knowingly prefers to put money into an (interest-bearing) fractional-reserve account, rather than into a (storage-fee-charging) 100 percent reserve account, then a blanket prohibition on fractional-reserve banking by force of law is a binding legal restriction on freedom of contact in the market for banking services.[^21]
> 
> [Moreover,] … [b]enefits accrue to bank depositors and noteholders, who receive interest and services paid for by the extra bank revenue generated from lending out a portion of its liabilities. Benefits accrue to bank borrowers who enjoy a more ample supply of intermediated credit, and to everyone who works with the economy’s consequently larger stock of capital equipment. And benefits must accrue to bank shareholders, who could choose to have the bank not issue demand liabilities if they found the risks not worth bearing.[^22]

Selgin and White have here put the cart before the horse. The existence of a practice, however widespread, has no bearing on the question of whether it is justifiable or not. Consider first, for illustrative purposes, the following analogy concerning the ethical permissibility of a state, that is, of a territorial monopolist of law and order (or of justice and protection).[^23]

In the words of Selgin and White (applied here in a different context and paraphrased), the group of people whose freedom of contract we are concerned with is not a small eccentric bunch, but is the great mass of people who have demonstrated that they do prefer states (judges and protectors) that operate on a monopolistic basis. Territorial inhabitants continue to patronize these states, demonstrating their preference for them. By the principle of demonstrated preference, territorial inhabitants must be presumed to benefit from the package they have agreed to accept, risk and all. Consequently, if any person knowingly prefers to put money into a tax-bearing state account, rather than into a protection-fee-charging account in nontaxing justice and protection agencies, then a blanket prohibition on state-formation by force of law is a binding legal restriction on freedom of contract in the market for justice and protection services. Moreover, benefits accrue to state depositors and noteholders, who receive interest and services paid for by the extra state revenue generated from employing parts of the deposits for extra tax collections. Benefits accrue to state borrowers who enjoy a more ample supply of intermediated credit, and to everyone who works with the economy’s consequently larger stock of capital equipment. And benefits must accrue to state shareholders, who could choose to have the state not engage in taxation if they found the risks not worth taking.

Given their own libertarian credentials, Selgin and White would presumably reject this analogy as false and inappropriate. But if so, why? What is it that invalidates the second *proof*, but not the first? What if anything, makes a blanket prohibition (or permission) of fractional reserve banking categorically different from a blanket prohibition (or permission) of state formation and operation?

The answer—that no such difference exists and that both proofs are equally invalid—is to be found in the Rothbardian principle of demonstrated preference. While Selgin and White invoke this principle in support of their conclusion regarding the ethical permissibility of fractional reserve banking, they miss its implication. The principle of demonstrated preference, as explained by Rothbard in his celebrated “Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics,” *presupposes* property rights. Not all demonstrated preferences are ethically permissible or socially beneficial. Instead, the only such preferences that are permissible and welfare enhancing are these that are expressed by means of one’s own property and nothing but one’s own property. Every preference demonstration by means of property other than one’s own—with other people’s property—is impermissible and nonbeneficial.

As for the demonstrated preference for states, it runs afoul of Rothbard’s principle. In Rothbard’s analysis, which is presumably accepted by the participants on both sides of the current debate, the violation can be quickly pinpointed. Private property, as the result of acts of (original) appropriation and/or production, implies the owner’s right to exclusive jurisdiction regarding his property, including the right to employ this property in defense against possible invasions and invaders. Indeed, there can be no property without an owner’s right to physical defense, and it is the very purpose of private property to establish separate domains of exclusive jurisdiction. No private-property owner can possibly surrender his right to ultimate jurisdiction over and defense of his property to someone else—unless he sells or otherwise transfers his property (in which case someone else would have exclusive jurisdiction over it). That is, so long as something (a good) has not been abandoned, its owner must be presumed as retaining these rights; and as far as his relations to others are concerned, every property owner may then only partake in the advantages of the division of labor and seek better and improved protection of his unalterable property rights through cooperation with other owners of property. Every property owner can buy from, sell to, or otherwise contract with everyone else concerning supplemental property protection and security services. Yet each owner also may at any time unilaterally discontinue any such cooperation with others. In distinct contrast, a territorial monopoly of protection and jurisdiction—a state—implies that every property owner is prohibited from discontinuing his cooperation with his protector, and that no one (except the monopolist) may exercise ultimate jurisdiction over his own property. Rather, everyone except the monopolist has lost his right to defense and is thus rendered defenseless vis-à-vis his own protector. Obviously, such an institution stands in contradiction to every owner’s demonstrated preference of not giving up his property. Contrary to their demonstrated preference, the monopolist prohibits the people from using their property in physical defense against possible invasions by himself and his agents. A monopoly of protection and jurisdiction rests thus from the outset on an impermissible act of expropriation (taxation) and provides the monopolist and his agents with a license to further expropriation and taxation. Every owner’s range of permissible actions regarding his own property, and hence the value of his property, is diminished, whereas the monopolist’s range of action and control is correspondingly enlarged and his exclusive privilege is reflected in an increase in the value of his property (capitalization of monopoly profit).

Presently, states exist everywhere, and almost everyone resides under state *protection*. Regardless of this preference demonstration, however, there is nothing wrong, ethically or economically, with blanket protection against state formation. No one may form a state, for the same reason that no one may expropriate or rob anyone else. In a court of law, it would be sufficient that a single property owner objected to the monopoly’s existence, and the monopolist would have to cease in his current operation as a tax-yielding protection agency and be repaired to the legal status of a nontaxing but fee-charging law-and-security agency (a normal specialized firm). A tax-yielding protection agency is a contradiction in terms—an invasive protector—and must be forbidden, irrespective of any benefits accruing to state depositors, state borrowers, and state owners. To do so is not a legal restriction on freedom of contract in the market for justice and protection services, but the very presupposition of freedom of contract and justice. Everyone putting money or any other resources into a tax-yielding protection account is engaged in unlawful action and subject to punishment.

Just as states exist everywhere, so do fractional reserve banks, and nowadays practically everyone is banking with fractional reserve banks. What, if anything, is the difference between the status of a state and that of a fractional reserve bank? Why should fractional reserve banks not be outlaw banks just as states outlaw protection agencies? To be sure, just as there can be no doubt concerning a demand for protection services, there can also be no doubt as to a demand for banking services. Yet the demand for protection services that private property owners may properly demonstrate does not include a demand for tax-yielding protection services, as we have seen. It exclusively permits a demand for fee-charging protection agencies. Why should an analogous distinction not be true also for banking services? Why should a demand for interest-yielding demand deposit accounts not be just as impermissible as the demand for tax-yielding protection accounts, on the ground that both interest-yielding deposit accounts and tax-yielding property protection are contradictions in terms? Why should the functions of a money warehouser and clearing institution (100-percent-reserve-deposit banking) and as an intermediary of credit (savings-and-loan banking) not be the only just forms of banking (just as fee-charging protection agencies are the only legitimate form of protection)?

[^14]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 87.

[^15]: Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?”, p. 70.

[^16]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 92–93.

[^17]: For instance, Hans-Hermann Hoppe (“From the Economics of Laissez-Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. [Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988], pp. 69ff.); and White’s review of Hoppe (Lawrence White, “Review of *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard,*” *Journal of Economic Literature* (June 1990): 664–65).

[^18]: Also see note 7 above. We will also show that these authors’ meaning of demand for (and supply of) money is misconceived. An increased demand for money (or potatoes or cars) is not just a wish to have more money (or potatoes), but greater *effective* demand.

[^19]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 95.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 93.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 88.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 94.

[^23]: To avoid any misunderstanding, the term monopoly is employed here in its Rothbardian definition as an exclusive privilege (or the absence of free entry). A monopoly of law and order means that one may turn for justice and protection only to one party—the state—and that it is exclusively this party that determines the content of justice and protection.