###  Utilitarian dan Randians vs Reason 

[^0]: Membalas ke “Symposium on Hoppe’s Argumentation Ethic”, *Liberty* (November 1988).

Ini adalah tidak mungkin maupun tidak bermanfaat untuk mengatasi semua poin yang dibesarkan dalam pembahasan sebelumnya. Saya akan berkonsentrasi pada kritik yang datang paling keras melawan argumen saya—semua itu adalah tipuan utilitarian. Saya kemudian akan berkomentar secara singkat mengenai jenis reaksi Randian.

Luar biasa, Friedman, Yeager, Steel, Waters, Virkkala, dan Jones percaya bahwa pasti telah mengabaikan fakta bahwa semua masyarakat yang ada kurang dari sepenuhnya libertarian (yang ada perbudakan, gulag, atau bahwa suami istri, dll.), dan yang ini entah bagaimana menyanggah argumen saya. Jelas, bahwa saya tidak akan menulis artikel ini jika menurut pendapat saya libertarianisme sudah lazim. Dengan demikian, seharusnya sudah jelas bahwa sifat realitas nonlibertarian inilah yang memotivasi saya untuk menunjukkan sesuatu yang sangat berbeda: mengapa keadaan seperti tidak dapat *dibenarkan*. Mengutip fakta-fakta seperti perbudakan sebagai contoh-kontra kira-kira setara dengan menyangkal bukti bahwa ::1+1=2:: menunjukkan bahwa seseorang baru saja datang dengan 3 sebagai jawaban—dan sama konyolnya.

Untuk menyatakan kembali klaim saya: Apakah sesuatu itu benar, kesalahan, atau tidak dapat diputuskan; apakah itu telah dibenarkan atau tidak; apa yang diperlukan dalam hal untuk membenarkannya; apakah saya, musuh saya, atau tidak satupun dari kita yang benar—semua ini harus diputuskan dalam proses argumentasi. Proposisi ini benar apriori karena tidak bisa dipungkiri tanpa menegaskannya dalam tindakan menyangkal hal tersebut. Seseorang tidak dapat membantah bahwa seseorang tidak dapat membantah, dan seseorang tidak dapat membantah mengetahui apa artinya untuk meningkatkan klaim validitas tanpa secara implisit mengklaim setidaknya penyangkalan proposisi ini benar.

Ini telah disebut "suatu priori argumentasi", dan itu karena status aksiomatis dari proposisi ini, analog dengan "aksioma tindakan" praksiologi, bahwa saya memanggil Mises dalam artikel saya. (Kemarahan Virkkala atas ini mendiskualifikasi dirinya sendiri karena saya secara eksplisit menyatakan bahwa Mises berpikir apa yang saya coba lakukan tidak mungkin. Terlebih lagi, ini adalah pemahamannya tentang Mises yang lucu. Meskipun benar bahwa pembicaraan praksiologis tentang marginalisme, jelas sekali Bukan kasus bahwa praksiologi sebagai kumpulan proposisi sama sekali dipengaruhi oleh pilihan marjinal. Praksiologi mengandung proposisi yang benar secara universal, dan apakah atau tidak kita memilih untuk menerima mereka sama sekali tidak memengaruhi hal ini. Hal ini di luar saya mengapa hal itu harus berbeda ketika menyangkut proposisi etis. Virkkala mungkin juga menyerang Mises untuk "mundur dari marginalisme" karena klaimnya bahwa praksiologi adalah *benar*.)

Dengan suatu apriori argumentasi yang terbentuk sebagai sebuah titik awal aksiomatis, Dengan demikian, apapun yang harus diperhatikan dalam tindakan pembuatan proposisi tidak bisa dipersoalkan secara proposisi lagi. Itu akan menjadi tidak berarti untuk meminta pembenaran dari prasangka yang membuat produksi bermakna proposisi mungkin di tempat pertama. Sebaliknya, mereka harus dianggap sebagai akhirnya dibenarkan oleh setiap pembuat proposisi. Setiap konten proposisional tertentu yang memperdebatkan validitasnya dapat dipahami sebagai menyiratkan pertentangan performatif (dalam arti yang dijelaskan oleh David Gordon), dan oleh karena itu, seperti yang pada akhirnya dipalsukan.

The law of contradiction is one such presupposition. One cannot deny this law without presupposing its validity in the act of denying it. But there is another such presupposition. Propositions are not freefloating entities. They require a proposition maker who in order to produce any validity claiming proposition whatsoever must have exclusive control (property) over some scarce means defined in objective terms and appropriated (brought under control) at definite points in time through homesteading action. Thus, any proposition that would dispute the validity of the homesteading principle of property acquisition or that would assert the validity of a different incompatible principle would be falsified by the act of proposition making in the same way as the proposition “the law of contradiction is false” would be contradicted by the very fact of asserting it. As the praxeological presupposition of proposition making, the validity of the homesteading principle cannot be argumentatively disputed without running into a performative contradiction. Any other principle of property acquisition can then be understood—reflectively—by every proposition maker as ultimately incapable of propositional justification. (Note, in particular, that this includes all proposals which claim it is justified to restrict the range of objects which may be homesteaded. They fail because once the exclusive control over *some* homesteaded means is admitted as justified, it becomes impossible to justify any restriction in the homesteading process—except for a selfimposed one—without thereby running into a contradiction. For if the proponent of such a restriction were consistent, he could have justified control only over some physical means which he would not be allowed to employ for any additional homesteading. Obviously, he could not interfere with another’s extended homesteading simply because of his own lack of physical means to do anything about it justifiably. But if he did interfere, he would thereby inconsistently extend his ownership claims beyond *his* own justly homesteaded means. Moreover, in order to justify this extension he would have to invoke a principle of property acquisition incompatible with the homesteading principle whose validity he would already have admitted.)

My entire argument, then, claims to be an impossibility proof. It is not, as the mentioned critics seem to think, a proof that means to show the impossibility of certain empirical events so that it could be refuted by empirical evidence. Instead, it is a proof that it is impossible to justify nonlibertarian property principles propositionally without falling into contradictions. Whatever such a thing is worth (and I’ll come to this shortly), it should be clear that empirical evidence has absolutely no bearing on it. So what if there is slavery, the gulag, taxation? The proof concerns the issue that claiming such institutions can be justified involves a performative contradiction. It is purely intellectual in nature, like logical, mathematical, or praxeological proofs. Its validity, like theirs, can be established independent of any contingent experiences. Nor is its validity in any way affected, as several critics—most notoriously Waters—seem to think, by whether or not people like, favor, understand, or come to a consensus regarding it, or whether or not they are actually engaged in argumentation.

Since considerations such as these are irrelevant in order to judge the validity of a mathematical proof, for instance, so are they beside the point here. In the same way as the validity of a mathematical proof is not restricted to the moment of proving it, so is the validity of the libertarian property theory not limited to instances of argumentation. If correct, the argument demonstrates its universal justification. (Of all utilitarian critics only Steele takes up the challenge that I had posed for them: that the assignment of property rights cannot be dependent on any later outcome because in this case no one could ever know before the outcome what he was or was not justified to do; and that in advocating a consequentialist position utilitarianism is [strictly speaking] no ethic at all if it fails to answer the alldecisive question “what am I justified to do now”? Steele solves this problem in the same way as he proceeds throughout his comment: by misunderstanding what it is. He misconceives my argument as subject to empirical testing and misrepresents it as claiming to show that “I favor a libertarian ethic” follows from “I am saying something”, while in fact it claims that entirely independent of whatever people happen to favor or utter “the libertarian ethic can be given an ultimate propositional justification” follows from “I claim such and such to be valid, i.e., capable of propositional justification”. His response to the consequentialist problem is yet another stroke of genius: No, says Steele, consequentialism must not involve a praxeologically absurd waiting-for-the-outcome ethic. His example: Certain rules are advocated first, then implemented, and later adjusted depending on outcomes. While this is indeed an example of consequentialism, I fail to see how it should provide an answer to “what are we justified in doing now”? and so escape the absurdities of a waiting-for-the-outcome ethic. The starting point is unjustified [Which rules? Not only the outcome depends on this!]; and the consequentialist procedure is unjustified, too. [Why not adopt rules and stick to them regardless of the outcome?] Steele’s answer to the question “what am I justified in doing”? is “that depends on whatever rules you start out with, then on the outcome of whatever this leads to, and finally on whether or not you care about such an outcome”. Whatever this is, it is no ethic.)

The reaction from the other Randian side, represented by Rasmussen, is different. He has fewer difficulties recognizing the nature of my argument but then asks me in turn “So what? Why should an a priori proof of the libertarian property theory make any difference? Why not engage in aggression anyway”? Why indeed?! But then, why should the proof that ::1+1=2:: make any difference? One certainly can still act on the belief that ::1+1=3::. The obvious answer is “because a propositional justification exists for doing one thing, but not for doing another”. But why should we be reasonable, is the next comeback. Again, the answer is obvious. For one, because it would be impossible to argue against it; and further, because the proponent raising this question would already affirm the use of reason in his act of questioning it. This still might not suffice and everyone knows that it would not, for even if the libertarian ethic and argumentative reasoning must be regarded as ultimately justified, this still does not preclude that people will act on the basis of unjustified beliefs either because they don’t know, they don’t care, or they prefer not to know. I fail to see why this should be surprising or make the proof somehow defective. More than this cannot be done by propositional argument.

Rasmussen seems to think that if I could get an “ought” derived from somewhere (something that Yeager claims I am trying to do though I explicitly denied this), then things would be improved. But this is simply an illusory hope. For even if Rasmussen had proven the proposition that one *ought* to be reasonable and *ought* to act according to the libertarian property ethic, this would still be just another propositional argument. It can no more assure that people will do what they ought to do than my proof can guarantee that they will do what is justified. Where is the difference, and what is all the fuss about? There is and remains a difference between establishing a truth claim and instilling a desire to act upon the truth—with “ought” or without it. It is surely great if a proof can instill this desire. But even if it does not, this can hardly be held against it. It also does not subtract anything from its merit if in some or even many cases a few raw utilitarian assertions prove more successful in persuading anyone of libertarianism than it can do. A proof is still a proof and social psychology remains social psychology.
