## Pagbabangko, Estado ng Bansa, at Politikang Internasyunal: Isang Sosyolohikal na Pagbabagong-tatag sa Kasalukuyang Ekonomikong Kaayusan

### Salapi at Pagbabangko

Upang maipaliwanag ang paglitaw ng barter, kinakailangan ang wala ng hihigt pa sa isang makitid na pagsasakahulugan ng pansariling interes. Tulad ng pagpili ng tao sa mas maraming mapagpipiliian ng produkto kaysa kakaunti, mas pipiliin niya ang barter at paghahati-hati ng gawain upang matustusan ang sariling pamumuhay.

Ang paglitaw ng salapi mula sa barter ay mula sa kaparis na makitid na pansariling interes, kung ang isang tao ay napabilang sa isang ekonomiya ng barterl at pinili ang isang mataas patungong mababang pamantayan ng pamumuhay, kanyang pipiliin ang isang karaniwang daluyan ng palitan. Sa pagpili ng salapi maaari niyang daigin ang pangunahing paghihigpit na ipinapataw sa pakikipagpalitan ng isang ekonomiyang barter, i.e., na nangangailangan ng pagkakaroon ng isang dobleng magkahalintulad na pagkakataon ng ninanais. Sa tulong ng salapi ang posibilidad ng pakikipagpalitan ay lumalawak. Ang bawat produkto ay maaring ipalit sa isa pang produkto, malaya mula sa mga dobleng magkahalintulad na pagkakataon at hindi perpektong mga dibisibilidad. At dito sa pinalawak na kakayahang makipagpalitan ang halaga ng bawat isang produkto sa kanyang pagmamay-ari ay tumataas.

Kung ang isang tao ay napabilang sa ekonomiya ng pakikipagpalitan, pinipilit siya ng sariling interes na humanap pa ng partikular na maibebentang produkto na may kaakit-akit na katangiang pansalapi gaya ng dibisibilidad, tibay, madaling makilala, madaling dalhin at kasalatan, at upang gamitin ang mga kalakal hindi para sariling kapakanan kundi para gamitin ang mga ito bilang pamamaraan ng pakikipagpalitan. Ang sarili niyang interes ang pipili ng kalakal bilang kanyang daluyan ng pakikipagpalitan na siyang karaniwang ginagamit din naman ng iba,. Sa katanuyan, katangian ng salapi na pangasiwaan ang palitan, upang palawakin ang hanay ng posibilidad ng palitan, at upang sa gayon ay mapataas ang halaga ng isang produkto ( hanggang sa lawak na itoy makitang nakapabilang na sa isang ekonomiyang palitan). Samakatuwid, mas higit na malawak na ginagamit ang isang produkto, mas higit nitong maipapamalas ang katangian nitong pangsalapi. Hinihimok ng walang anuman kundi ng makitid na pansariling interes, palaging mas pipiliin ng tao ang isang mas pangkalahtang at, kung posible, isang pang-unibersal na daluyan ng palitan patungo sa isang mas hindi pangkalahatan at pang-unibersal. Kung mas karaniwan ang isang salapi, mas malawak ang merkado kung saan ang isa ay kabilang, mas rasyonal ang halaga at kalkulasyon ng gastos ng isang tao (mula sa pananaw ng isang nagnais-nais ng ekonomoking pagsasama-sama at pagpapalwak ng yaman), mas higit ang kapakinabangan na ang isang tao ang aani mula sa paghahati-hati ng paggawa.[^1]

Base sa karanasan, siyempre, ang produkto na minsan ng napili bilang "best-because-most-universal-money" ay ginto. Nang walang pamimilit ng pamahalaan ang ginto ang muling mapipili sa nakikitang hinaharap bilang isang produkto na pinakanagpapamalas ng katangian ng salapi. Ang pansariling interes ang magbubunsod sa lahat na piliin ang ginto— bilang isang unibersal na ginagamit na daluyan ng palitan—kumpara sa iba pang salapi. Hanggang sa lawak na ang bawat indibidwal ay nakikita ang kanyang sarili at ang kanyang pagmamay-ari bilang kasapi sa isang ekonomiyang palitan, mas pipiliin niya ang ang akawnting sa paraan ng ginto kaysa iba pang anyo ng salapi, dahil ang unibersal na pagtanggap sa ginto ay nabubunsod sa isang akawnting bilang ang pinakakumpletong pagpapahayag ng opportunidad ng paggastos ng isang tao, at samakatuwid ay nagiging gabay sa isang tao para sa kanyang pagsubok na mapalawak pa ang kanyang yaman. Ang lahat ng iba pang salapi ay mabilis na maaalis sa paggamit, dahil kahit anumang mas mababang uri kaysa sa unibersal at pang-internasyunal na salapi gaya ng ginto—gaya ng pambansa at rehiyonal na salapi,—ay sasalungatin ang mismong layunin ng pagkakaroon ng salapi sa simula pa lamang. Ang salapi ay naimbento ng isang taong may sariling interes upang mapalawak ang kanyang yaman sa pamamagitan ng pagsasapabilang ng kayang sarili sa isang lumalawak at tiyak na unibersal na merkado. Sa paghabol sa pansariling interes, ang mga pambansa at pangrehiyon na mga salapi ay mabilisang di na makakalaban pa at mapapalitan ng ginto, dahil tanging ginto ang magbubunsod sa pagkakabuo ng ekonomikong pagsasama-sama at ang merkado nito ay pandaigdigan, sa gayon ay tinutupad nito ang pinakakatangian ng salapi bilang pangkaraniwang daluyan ng.[^2]

Ang paglitaw ng salapi, ng lalong umiinam na mga salapi, at sa huli ng isang pang-unibersal na salapi, ang ginto, ang siyang nagpalaya sa mga produktibong enerhiya na noon ay nananatiling bigo at walang ginagawa dahil sa paghihigpit-ng-dobleng-magkahalintulad na pagkakataon-ng-ninanais sa proseso ng mga palitan (gaya ng palitan ng mga nagpapaligsahang salapi na may malayang pabago-bagong antas). Sa ilalim ng barter ang merkado para sa produkto ng prodyuser ay hinahadlangan sa mga pagkakataon ng dobleng makahalintulad na pagkakakataon na naisin. Kung saan ang lahatt ng presyo ay nasa tuntunin ng ginto, ang merkado ng prodyuser ay madalas na malawak at tumatagal ang epekto na hindi tinatakdaan sa anumang kawalan ng dobleng magkahalintulad na pagkakataon sa isang pangdaigidigang saklaw. Accordingly, production increases—and increases more with gold than with any other money. With increased production the value of money in turn rises; and the higher purchasing power of money reduces one’s reservation demand for it, lowers one’s effective rate of time preference (the originary rate of interest), and leads to increased capital formation. An upward spiraling process of economic development is set in motion.

This development creates the basis for the emergence of banks as specialized money-handling institutions. On the one hand, banks come forward to meet the increasing demand for the safekeeping, transporting, and clearing of money. On the other hand, they fulfill the increasingly important function of facilitating exchanges between capitalists (savers) and entrepreneurs (investors), actually making an almost complete division of labor between these roles possible. As institutions of deposit and in particular as savings and credit institutions, banks quickly assume the rank of nerve centers of an economy. Increasingly the spatial and temporal allocation and coordination of economic resources and activities takes place through the mediation of banks; and in facilitating such coordination the emergence of banks implies still another stimulus for economic growth.[^3]

While it is in everyone’s economic interest that there be only one universal money and only one unit of account, and man in his pursuit of wealth maximization will not stop until this goal is reached, it is contrary to such interest that there be only one bank or one monopolistic banking system. Rather, self-interest commands that every bank use the same universal money—gold—and that there then be no competition between different monies, but that free competition between banks and banking systems, all of which use gold, must exist. Only so long as free entry into banking exists will there be cost efficiency in this as in any other business; yet only as long as this competition concerns services rendered in terms of one and the same money commodity will free banking actually be able to fulfill the very function of money and banking, i.e., of facilitating economic integration rather than disintegration, of widening the market and expanding the division of labor rather than restricting them, of making value and cost accounting more rather than less rational, and hence of increasing rather than decreasing economic wealth. The notion of competition between monies is a *contradiction in adjecto*. Strictly speaking, a monetary system with rival monies of freely fluctuating exchange rates is still a system of (partial) barter, riddled with the problem of requiring double coincidences of wants in order for (some) exchanges to take place. The existence of such a system is dysfunctional of the very purpose of money.[^4] Freely pursuing his own self-interest, man would immediately abandon it—and it would be a fundamental misconception regarding the essence of money to think of the free market not only in terms of competing banks but also in terms of competitive monies.[^5] Competitive monies are not the outcome of free market actions but are invariably the result of coercion, of government imposed obstacles placed in the path of rational economic conduct.

With free banking based on a universal gold standard emerging, the goal of achieving the most cost efficient solution to coordinating and facilitating interspatial and intertemporal exchanges within the framework of a universally integrated market is accomplished. Prices for the service of safekeeping, transporting and clearing money, as well as for advancing money in time-contracts would drop to their lowest possible levels under a regime of free entry. And since these prices would be expressed in terms of one universal money, they would truly reflect the minimum costs of providing market-integrative services.

Moreover, bank competition combined with the fact that money must emerge as a commodity—such as gold—which in addition to its value as money has a commodity value and thus cannot be produced without significant cost-expenditure, also provides the best possible safeguard against fraudulent banking.

As money depositing institutions, banks—much like other institutions depositing fungible commodities yet more so in the case of banks because of the special role of the commodity money—are tempted to issue “fake” warehouse receipts, i.e., notes of deposit not covered by real money, as soon as such banknotes have assumed the role of money substitutes and are treated by market participants as unquestionable equivalents of actually deposited real money. In this situation, by issuing fake or fiat banknotes that physically cannot be distinguished from genuine money substitutes, a bank can—fraudulently and at another’s expense—increase its own wealth. It can directly purchase goods with such fake notes and thus enrich itself in the same way as any simple counterfeiter does. The bank’s real wealth and the wealth of the early recipients of the money increases through these purchases, and at the same time and by the same action the wealth of those receiving the new money late or not at all decreases, due to the inflationary consequences of counterfeiting. Or a bank can use such fiat money to expand its credit and earn interest on it. Once again a fraudulent income and wealth redistribution in the bank’s favor takes place.[^6] Yet in addition, this time a boom-bust cycle is also set in motion: Placed at a lowered interest rate, the newly granted credit causes increased investments and initially creates a boom that cannot be distinguished from an economic expansion; however, this boom must turn bust because the credit that stimulated it does not represent real savings but instead was created out of thin air. Hence, with the entire new and expanded investment structure under way, a lack of capital must arise that makes the successful completion of all investment projects systematically impossible and instead requires a contraction with a liquidation of previous malinvestments.[^7]

Under the gold standard any bank or banking system (including a monopolist one) would be constrained in its own inclination to succumb to such temptations by two requirements essential for successful counterfeiting. On the one hand, the banking public must not be suspicious of the trustworthiness of the bank—that is, its anti-fraud vigilance must be low for otherwise a bank run would quickly reveal the committed fraud. On the other hand, the bank cannot inflate its notes at such a pace that the public loses confidence in the notes’ purchasing power, reduces its reservation demand for them and flees instead towards “real” values, including real money, and thereby drives the counterfeiter into bankruptcy. Under a system of free banking, however, with no legal tender laws and gold as money, an additional constraint on potential bank fraud arises, for then every bank is faced with the existence of nonclients or clients of different banks. If in this situation additional counterfeit money is brought into circulation by a bank, it must invariably reckon with the fact that the money may end up in nonclients’ hands who demand immediate redemption, which the bank then would be unable to grant without at least a painful credit contraction. In fact, such a corrective contraction could only be avoided if the additional fiat money were to go exclusively into the cash reserves of the bank’s own clients and were used by them exclusively for transactions with other clients. Yet since a bank would have no way of knowing whether or not such a specific outcome could be achieved, or how to achieve it, the threat of a following credit contraction would act as an inescapable economic deterrent to any bank fraud.[^8]

[^1]: On the free-market development of money, see Carl Menger, *Principles of Economics* (New York: New York University Press, 1976), pp. 257–85; “Geld,” in Carl Menger, *Gesammelte Werke*, vol. IV (Tübingen: Mohr, 1970).

[^2]: On the gold standard, see Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., ed., *The Gold Standard: An Austrian Perspective* (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1985), Ron Paul and Lewis Lehrman, *The Case for Gold* (San Francisco: Cato Institute, 1983).

[^3]: On banking and in particular the different function of loan and deposit banking, see Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983).

[^4]: See Murray N. Rothbard, *The Case for a 100 Percent Gold Dollar* (Meriden, Conn.: Cobden Press, 1984), pp. 32–34.

[^5]: A highly prominent example for this misconception is F.A. Hayek, *Denationalization of Money* (London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1976); for a critique see Murray N. Rothbard, “Hayek’s Denationalized Money,” *Libertarian Forum* XV, nos. 5–6 (August 1981–January 1982).

[^6]: On the counterfeiting process, see Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking*, chap. IV; also Elgin Groseclose, *Money: The Human Conflict* (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1934), pp. 178 and 273.

[^7]: On the Austrian business cycle theory, see Ludwig von Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit* (lrvington-on-Hudson, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1971); idem, *Human Action* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966), chap. XX; F.A. Hayek, *Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1975); *Prices and Production* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1967); Richard von Strigl, *Kapital und Produktion* (Vienna: Julius Springer, 1934); Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), vol. 2, chap. 12.

[^8]: What about cartels? Could not the competing banks form a cartel and agree on a joint venture in counterfeiting? Again, under free banking this is most unlikely, because a system of free banking is characterized by the complete absence of any economic incentive for cartelization. With no restrictions of entry in existence, any such bank cartel would have to be classified as voluntary and would suffer from the same problems as any voluntary cartel: Faced with the threat of noncartelists and/or new entrants, and recognizing that like all cartel agreements, a banking cartel would favor the less efficient cartel members at the expense of the more efficient ones, there is simply no economic basis for successful action, and any attempt to cartelize would quickly break down as economically inefficient. Moreover, insofar as the counterfeit money would be employed to expand credit, banks acting in concert would set off a full-scale boom-bust cycle. This, too, would deter cartelization. See on the theory of free banking Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 434–48; Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking*, chap. VIII.