#### Ang sistema ng mamumuhunan

Tulad ng isang pasya makakahanap pa rin ng labis na suporta kapag sa huli ay isinaalang-alang ni keynes teorya ang sistema ng pamumuhunan. Para kay keynes ay walang kaibigan mula sa kapitalismo at mga mamumunuhan ang dapat na halata galing sa itaas ng mga pagsipi. Sa katunayan, sa pamamagitan ng pagtataguyod "isang pagsasapanlipunan ng pangangapital" sya ay lumabas nang lantaran bilang isang sosyolista. [^67] Para kay keynes, kapitalismo *ay nangangahulugang* krisis.

Kinikilala nya ang dalawang mahalagang mga dahilan para dito, ang pang una, na kung saan ang keynes ay mga katangian ng cyclical nature na sistema ng pamumunuhan, ay nai-naantig na. Tiyak, sa haba ng panahon bilang ang kurso ng ekonomiya ay higit na tinutukoy ng mga kapitalista, batay sa ating napakinggan, "ay higit na mga ignorante sa kung ano ang kanilang binibili", at nakipagsabwatan "para maitago ang mga salat na bagay", ito ay maaring hindi maganda at ang kahit isa dito. Depende sa karamihan ng tao kung kanino nakabase ang kanilang mga desisyon sa kanilang "panunaw at lagay ng panahon", ang proseso ng kapitalista ay dapat na mali-mali. Napilitan sa pamamagitan ng "paglaki at pagliit" ng negosyong optimismo at pesismo, na kung lumiko ay malaman sa pamamagitan ng "hindi makokontrol at hindi sumusunod na sikolohiya ng mundo ng negosyo," sa paglaki at pagputok ay hindi inaasahan. Ang ikot ng negosyo - ang sentral na mensahe ng kabanata 22 ng Keynes *Pangkalahatang Teyorya*, ang "Mga tala sa ikot ng pagpapalitan"—ay *sikolohikal* natukoy na hindi pangkaraniwang bagay. Ito ay tiyak na mali. Ang isang sikolohikal na paliwanag ng ikot ng negosyo ay mahigpit na imposible, at upang isipin ito bilang isang paliwanag na nagsasangkot sa isang kategoryang pagkakamali: Ang pag-ikot ng negosyo ay halatang totoong mga pangyayari, maranasan sa pamamagitan ng mga indibidwal, ngunit maranasan sa pamamagitan ni bilang pagsulpot sa labas nila sa mundo ng totoong kalakal at totoong kayamanan. Paniniwala, kaisipan, inaasahan, optimismo, at pesismo sa ibang panig ay *sikolohikal* na hindi karaniwang bagay. Ang isa ay maaaring magisip ng isang sikolohikal na hindi karaniwang bagay bilang nakaka-apekto at nakakaimpluwensya sa iba pa, ngunit ito ay imposible na mag-isip ng isang sikolohikal na hindi karaniwang bagay bilang pagkakaroon ng anumang direktang epekto sa kahihinatnan sa labas ng mundo ng totoong mga bagay at kalakal. Sa pamamagitan lamang ng *mga kilos* ang maaaring paraan ng totoong mga pangyayari na maaaring maimpluwensyahan; at anumang pagpapaliwanag ng ikot ng negosyo ay dapat nangangailangan maging isang *prakseyolohikal* (bilang pagsalungat sa isang sikolohikal) isa. Ang Keynes sikolohikal na ikot ng negosyo ay sa katotohanan *ay hindi maipapaliwanag ang anumang totoong nangyayari*. Gayunman, bilang totoong mga bagay ay dapat mangyari sa tao ay dapat kumilos, at magtalaga at magbago ng talaga ng kakaunting mga yaman upang pahalagahan ang mga mithiin. Ang isa ay kayang kumilos bilang nagkataon, kahit na, habang si Keynes ay magkakaroon nito, dahil sa pagkilos ng isa ay walang pagbabagong napipigilan sa pamamagitan ng totoong kakulangan na kung saan ay hindi maaapektuhan sa pamamagitan ng ating sikolohikal sa lahat. Kahit na napaliwanag ni Keynes sa kanyang teyorya kung bakit ang pagnenegosyong pabagu-bago ay nagbubunga sa anumang *partikular* na padron ng pabago-bago sa negosyo—tulad ng sa paglaki at pagputok ng ikot, na dapat niyang gustuhin na ipaliwanag—sa halip ng anumang iang aspeto ng mga padron ng pagbabago.

Ang pangalawang dahilan para sa kawalang tatag ng kapitalismo, at ang kagustuhan ng isang sosyalistang kalutasan, ayon kay Keynes, ay ang kapitalismong likas na pagwawalang-kilos na tunguhin. Ang kanyang kawalang-kilos na teyorya ay sumesentro sa paligid ng paniwala na kung saan ay tinahak niya mula sa Hobson at Mummery, at nagtataguyod, "na sa normal na estado ng modernong industriyang pamayanan, ang pagkunsumo ay naglilimita sa produksyon at hindi ang pagkonsumong produksyon."[^68]" Para dito bilang isa sa kanyang nangungusap na katotohanan lamang ng walang katuturang para sundin.

Ang pagwawalang-kilos ay dahil sa isang kakulangan ng pagkonsumo. "Hanggang sa punto na kung saan ay may lubos na trabaho ang nanaig," sinulat niya, "ang paglaki ng kapital ay nakadepende hindi lang sa isang mababang pagkamalikhain sa pagkonsumo ngunit ay, sa kabilang banda, nahahawakan ulit dahil dito."[^69] Pagsama nito sa ilalim ng konsumong thesis ay isang "pangunahing sikolohikal na batas, na kung saan ay nakalaan na dumepende sa labis na tiwala sa parehong isang prayoridad mula sa aying kaalaman ng likas ng tao at mula sa detalyadong katotohanan ng karanasan, na ang mga tao ay nakalaan, bilang isang patakaran at sa karaniwan, upang mapataas ang kanilang konsumo habang ang kanilang sweldo ay tumataas, ngunit hindi sa katulad sa pagtaas ng kanilang konsumo sa pagtaas ng kanilang sweldo."[^70] "bilang isang patakaran … isang mas malaki na proporsyon ng sweldo [ay maaari] maligtas tulad ng totoong pagtaas ng sweldo."[^71]

Sa sarili nito, ang pangalawang batas, na kung saan ay tanggap bilang maging totoo dito para sa kapakanan ng argumento (maliban sa pagdaragdag ng konsumo ay, siyempre, hindi babagsak sa zero), ay tila hindi upang maipahiwatig ang anumang gulo. Ano naman? Kung ang pag-iipon ay naglalabis ng proporsyonal na tumataas habang tumataas ang sweldo, mas maganda para sa produktong panlipunan.[^72] Ngunit si keynes, sa kanyang katangiang lohika na walang inaalala na paraan ng pag-iisip ng pagsali sa batas na ito ng tesis na ang produksyon ay limitado sa pagkonsumo, at hindi siya mahihirapan na patunayan kung ano man ang naisin niya.

Kung ang pagkonsumo ay nililimitahan ang produksyon, at kung ang walang konsumo ay tumataas kasama ang pagtaas ng sweldo, sa gayon talagang kailangan sundin ang pagtaas ng sweldon ay nagpapahiwatig ng kanilang salariling pagkatastas sa pamamagitan ng pagtaas ng walang konsumo, na akung saan ay nililimitahan ang produksyon, atbp. At kung gayayon man, ito ay tila sumusunod sa pagpapayaman ng lipunan, na kung saan ang mas hindi konsumo, ay dapat maging salot partikular na matigas sa pamamagitan nitong "stagnitis"; at sa anumang binigay na panlipunan na dapat maging mayaman, na komukunsumo ng marami, na pinaka nag-aambag sa pagwawalang-kilos na ekonomiya (maliban sa "maliit" na problema na kung saan ang isa ay hindi maipaliwanag, ayon sa teyorya, bakit ang mga indibidwal o mga lipunan ay maaring maging mas mayaman kaysa sa iba sa una palang!). Sa anumang kaso, si Keynes ay tinatanggap ang mga konklusyon na ito na totoo.[^73] Alinsunod, nagpakita siya ng kanyang mga rekomendasyon kung paano makakalis sa pagwawalang-kilos. Sa pagdadagdag sa isang "komprehensibong pagsasapanlipunan ng puhunan," si Keynes ay nagmumungkahi ng mga hakbang upang pasiglahin ang pagkonsumo, sa partikular sa muling pamimigay ng sweldo mula sa mga mayayaman (taong may isang mababang pagkamalihain sa pagkonsumo) sa mahihirap (mga tao na may mataas na pagkamalikhain sa pagkonsumo).

> Habang nagpupuntirya sa isang panlipunang kontrol na antas singil ng puhunan na may isang pananaw sa progresibong pagtanggi sa nasa gilid ng kahusayan ng kapital dapat kong suportahan sa parehong oras ang lahat ng uri ng mga pulisiya para sa pagpapataas ng pagkamalikhain sa pagkonsumo. Dahil ito ay malamang na hindi na buong trabaho ay maaaring mapanatili, anuman ang maaari nating gawin tungkol sa pamumuhunan, sa umiiral na pagkamalikhain sa pagkonsumo. There is room, therefore, for both policies to operate together;—to promote investment and, at the same time, to promote consumption, not merely to the level which with the existing propensity to consume would correspond to the increased investment, but to a higher level still.[^74]

How is such a thing as simultaneously promoting investment and consumption in order to increase income conceivably possible? In fact, Keynes gives us his own formal definitions of the terms involved: “income = consumption + investment; saving = income - consumption; therefore, saving = investment.”[^75] Under these definitions, a simultaneous increase in consumption and investment out of a given income is conceptually impossible!

Keynes is not terribly disturbed over “details” such as these. In order to get what he wants, he simply shifts, completely unnoted, the meanings of his terms. He drops the just quoted formal definitions, which would render such a result impossible, and he adopts a new meaning for the term saving. Instead of unconsumed income, saving quietly comes to mean hoarding (i.e., the act of not-spending money on *either* consumer *or* capital goods).[^76] Thereby the results can be easily made to come out right. For then savings are no longer equal to investment; and saving, being defined as the act of *not*-spending, automatically acquires a negative connotation, while investment and consumption take on a positive one. Moreover, now one must almost naturally be worried about savings exceeding investment, or so it seems, for this would seem to imply that something is leaking out of the economy, and that income (defined as investment + consumption) must be somehow reduced. Keynes certainly worries about this possibility. He calls it “a chronic tendency throughout human history for the propensity to save to be stronger than the inducement to invest.”[^77] And this chronic tendency must surely be particularly pronounced if incomes are high, for then, as we have been told, savings reach a particularly high proportion of income. But do not despair. Where something can leak out, something also can leak in. If savings is unspent money, then savings can be brought into existence, simple enough, by means of governmental money creation, so as to compensate for the outward leakage which tends to increase with increasing incomes. There is the danger, of course, that these compensatory “community savings” immediately leak out again by being added to the private sector’s cash hoardings (because, according to Keynes, the newly created savings would lower the interest rate, and this in turn would increase the capitalists’ liquidity preference so as to counteract such a tendency and to artificially “keep capital scarce”). But this can be taken care of by the “socialization of investment” as we know, and by some Gesellian stamped money schemes (“The idea behind stamped money is sound”).[^78] And once saving and investing is done publicly—through the agency of the State, as Keynes would say—and all money is spent, and no keep-things-scarce motive is in the way any longer, there is indeed no longer any problem with increasing consumption and investment simultaneously. Since savings is unspent money, and newly created money and credit is just as genuine as any other because it is not “forced” on anyone, savings can be created by the stroke of a pen.[^79] And since the State, contrary to the scarcity-exploiting capitalists, can make sure that these additional genuine savings are indeed being spent (instead of wandering into hoards), any increase in the supply of money and credit through governmental counterfeiting increases consumption and investment at the same time and so promotes income twice. Permanent inflation is Keynes’s cure-all. It helps overcome stagnation; and more of it overcomes the more severe stagnation crises of the more advanced societies. And once stagnation is defeated, still more inflation will abolish scarcity within one generation.[^80]

Yet the wonders do not cease. What is this leakage, this surplus of savings over investment, that constitutes all such dangers? Something must leak from somewhere to someplace else, and it must play some role here and some there. Keynes tries to disperse such thoughts by asking us once again not to apply logic to economics. “Contemporary thought,” he writes, “is still deeply steeped in the notion that if people do not spend their money in one way they will spend it in another.”[^81] It would seem hard to imagine how this contemporary thought could possibly be wrong, but Keynes believes it false. For him there exists a third alternative. Something, an economic good one would think, simply drops out of existence, and this means trouble.

> An act of individual saving means—so to speak—a decision not to have dinner to-day. But it does *not* necessitate a decision to have dinner or buy a pair of boots a week hence or a year hence or to consume any specified thing at any specified date. Thus it depresses the business of preparing to-day’s dinner without stimulating the business of making ready for some future act of consumption. It is not a substitution of future consumption-demand for present consumption-demand—it is a net *diminution* of such demand.[^82]

Still, the strictures of a two-valued logic do not quite crumble yet. How can there be any net diminution of something? What is not spent on consumer goods or capital goods must still be spent on something else—namely on cash. *This exhausts all possibilities*. Income and wealth can be and must be allocated to consumption, investment, or cash. Keynes’s diminution, the leakage, the excess of savings over investment, is income spent on, or added to, cash hoardings. But such an increase in the demand for cash has no effect on income, consumption, and investment whatever, as has already been explained. With the social money stock being given, a general increase in the demand for cash can only be brought about by bidding down the money prices of nonmoney goods. But so what?[^83] Nominal income (i.e., income in terms of money) will fall; but real income and the real consumption-investment proportion will be entirely unchanged. And people along the way get what they want: an increase in the real value of their cash balances, and of the purchasing power of the money unit. There is nothing stagnating here, or draining, or leaking, and Keynes has offered *no theory of stagnation at all* (and with this, of course, also no theory of how to get out of stagnation). He merely has given a perfectly normal phenomenon such as falling prices (caused by an increased demand for money, or by an expanding productive economy) a bad name in calling it stagnation, or depression, or the result of a lacking effective demand, so as to find just another excuse for his own inflationary schemes.[^84]

Here we have Keynes in his entire greatness: the twentieth century’s most famous “economist.” Out of false theories of employment, money, and interest, he has distilled a fantastically wrong theory of capitalism and of a socialist paradise erected out of paper money.

[^67]: Keynes’s socialism, however, is not the egalitarian-proletarian version as espoused by the Bolsheviks. For this Keynes has nothing but contempt. His socialism is of the fascist or Nazi variety. In the preface to the German edition of his *General Theory* (which appeared in late 1936) he wrote:

> The theory of aggregate production that is the goal of the following book can be much more easily applied to the conditions of a totalitarian state than the theory of the production and distribution of a given output turned out under the conditions of free competition and of a considerable degree of *laissez-faire*. (quoted from Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* p. 277)

[^68]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 368\. On the Keynesian theory of stagnation see also Alvin H. Hanson, *Fiscal Policy and Business Cycles* (New York: Norton, 1941); for a critique see George Terborgh, *The Bogey of Economic Maturity* (Chicago: Machinery and Allied Products Institute, 1945); also Murray N. Rothbard, “Breaking Out of the Walrasian Box: The Cases of Schumpeter and Hansen,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 1 (1987).

[^69]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 372–73.

[^70]: Ibid., p. 96.

[^71]: Ibid., p. 97; also pp. 27f.

[^72]: In fact, Keynes informs us that *savings is by definition identical to investment* (p. 63), “that the excess of income over consumption, which we call saving, cannot differ from the addition to capital equipment which we call investment” (p. 64). Then, however, a reduced proportion of consumption expenditures must by definition go hand in hand with accordingly increased investments, and this would lead to a higher future income, to still more absolute consumption and still more absolute and relative saving and investment. Where, indeed, is the problem here?

[^73]: Keynes writes,

> If in a potentially wealthy community the inducement to invest is weak, then, in spite of its potential wealth, the working of the principle of effective demand will compel it to reduce its actual output, until, in spite of its potential wealth, it has become so poor that its surplus over its consumption is sufficiently diminished to correspond to the weakness of the inducement to invest. (*The General Theory*, p. 31)

Or:

> The greater, moreover, the consumption for which we have provided in advance, the more difficult it is to find something further to provide for in advance, and the greater our dependence on present consumption as a source of demand. Yet the larger our incomes, the greater, unfortunately, is the margin between our incomes and our consumption. So, failing some novel expedient, there is, as we shall see, no answer to the riddle, except that there must be sufficient unemployment to keep us so poor that our consumption falls short of our income by no more than the equivalent of the physical provision for future consumption which it pays to produce to-day. (p. 105)

[^74]: Ibid., p. 325; or “the remedy would lie in various measures designed to increase the propensity to consume by the redistribution of incomes or otherwise” (p. 324).

[^75]: Ibid., p. 63\. It is typical of Keynes’s philosophy of abundance that he gets things upside down here as well. For the correct definitions are: product produced = income; income - consumption = saving; saving = investment. Where does Keynes’s income come from?

[^76]: See on this also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* pp. 120–23.

[^77]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 347.

[^78]: Ibid., p. 357.

[^79]: See on this note 51.

[^80]: On his program of permanent inflation see also this remark on the trade cycle: “The right remedy for the trade cycle is not to be found in abolishing booms and keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom” (p. 322). The answer to credit expansion, that is, is still more credit expansion.

[^81]: Ibid., p. 20.

[^82]: Ibid., p. 210; second emphasis added.

[^83]: Contrary to Keynes’s fanciful fears, the demand for money can never be infinite, because everyone must obviously consume sometimes (and cannot delay consumption further); and at such points liquidity preference is definitely finite.

[^84]: The second element of Keynes’s stagnation theory is equally false. It may be that that saving in the definition of equaling investment increases overproportionally with increasing incomes—while it can never reach 100 percent. Yet this situation certainly should give no one concern regarding the social income produced. It is, however, *not* true that savings in the sense of hoarding increases with increasing incomes, and that the greatest leakage then occurs among the rich and in wealthy societies. The opposite is true. If real income increases because the economy, supported by additional savings, is expanding, the purchasing power of money increases (the money stock being given). But at a higher purchasing power of the money unit, the amount of cash demanded actually falls (the demand for money schedule being given). Thus, if anything, the leakstagnation nonproblem should actually diminish rather than increase with increasing wealth.