
Pangatlo, kung sinuman ang nakakita sa mga estasyon ng pulis at mga korte na pinapatakbo ng estado, hindi na babangitin pa ang sa bilangguan, ang nakakaalam kung gaano totoo na ang mga kadahilanan ng produksyon na ginagamit upang bigyan tayo ng gayong seguridad ay sobrang na sa paggamit, masama na pinananatili, at masukal. Dahil walang sinuman ang gumagamit ng mga kadahilanang ito ng produksyon na ang tunay na nagmamay-ari sa kanila (hindi pwedeng ibenta ang mga ito at pribadong naaangkop ang mga resibo mula sa pagbebenta) at mga pagkalugi (at mga natamo) sa halaga na nakalagay sa kabisera na ginamit o kaya sa panlipunan, bawat isa ay dumako dahil sa pagtaas
ng kanyang pribadong kita na nagreresulta mula sa paggamit ng mga kadahilanan sa kapinsalaan ng pagkalugi sa halaga ng kabisera.
Dahil dito, ang paggastos sa paligid ay lalong tumataas sa halaga ng produkto sa paligid, at isang resulta ng paggamit ng puhunan ay magreresulta. At kung, sa isang pambihirang kaso, hindi ito nangyayari at ang isang sobrang paggamit ay hindi dapat maging malinaw, pagkatapos ito ay posible lamang sa mga gastos na medyo mas mataas kaysa sa mga katulad na pribadong negosyo.[^26]

[^26]: Sums up Molinari, Ang Seguridad ng Produksyon, sa pahina. 13–14,
    
    > Kung ... ang taga-konsumo ay hindi libre upang bumili ng seguridad saan man nya gusto, pandaka mong makita buksan ang isang malaking katungkulan na nakatuon sa nagkataon at masamang pamamahala. Ang hustisya ay nagiging mabagal at magastos, ang pulis ay nakakaasar, ang kalayaan ng bawat isa ay hindi na iginagalang, ang presyo ng seguridad ay sobra ang napalaki at di-maihahalintulad na bahagi, alinsunod sa kapangyarihan at impluwensya ng ito o sa uri ng mga kustomer. 

Walang kahit anong pagdududa, ang lahat ng mga problemang ito na likas sa isang sistema ng monopolistikong produksyon ng seguridad ay malulutas nang may kaugnayan na mabilis sa sandaling isang naibigay na pangangailangan para sa mga serbisyo sa seguridad ay natutugunan ng isang magkakatalong merkado na may ganap na iba't ibang istrukturang insentibo para sa mga taga-gawa. Walang sinasabi na ang isang "perpektong" solusyon sa problema ng seguridad ay matatagpuan. Mananatili pa rin ang mga pagnanakaw at pagpatay; at hindi lahat ng pagnanakaw ay mababawi ni lahat ng mga mamamatay-tao ay nahuhuli. Ngunit sa mga tuntunin ng mga pagsusuri ng mga mamimili ang 
sitwasyon ay mapapabuti kung ang kalikasan ng tao ay magpapahintulot na ito ay mapahusay. Una, hangga't nandiyan ang mapagkakumpetensyang sistema (i.e., dapat sabihin, hangga't ang mga taga-gawa ng mga serbisyo ng seguridad ay nakasalalay sa kusang loob ng pagbili, karamihan sa mga ito ay malamang na kumuha ng anyo ng mga kontrata ng serbisyo at seguro na napagkasunduan sa mas pinahusay na anumang aktwal na "pangyayari" ng kawalan ng seguridad o agresyon), walang taga-gawa ang makakapagtaas ng kita nito nang hindi pinapabuti ang mga serbisyo o kalidad ng produkto na itinuturing ng mga taga-konsumo. Gayon din, ang lahat ng mga taga-gawa ng seguridad 
na kinuhang magkasama ay hindi makapagbubuti sa kahalagahan ng kanilang partikular na industriya maliban sa, sa anumang dahilan, ang mga taga-konsumo ay nagsimula nang malaman ang seguridad na mas mataas kaysa sa iba pang mga kalakal, sa gayon tinitiyak na ang produksyon ng seguridad ay hindi kailanman magaganap sa gastos ng hindi - o kaya ay nabawasan ang produksyon ng, ipaalam sa amin sabihin, kaysa, bilang isang nakikipagkumpitensya sa pribadong kalakal. Bilang isang karagdagan, ang mga taga-gawa ng mga serbisyo sa seguridad ay kailangang pagbagu-bagohin ang kanilang mga pag-aalay sa isang malaking antas dahil ang isang mataas na pagkakaiba-iba ng pangangailangan para sa mga produkto ng seguridad sa milyon-milyong at milyon-milyong mga taga-konsumo na umiiral. Direktang nakasalalay sa boluntaryong suporta ng mamimili, agad silang nasasaktan sa pananalapi kung hindi sila nararapat na tumugon sa iba't ibang nais o pagbabago ng mga gusto ng mga mamimili. Ang bawat ganitong taga-konsumo ay magkakaroon ng direktang impluwensya, bagaman kahit na maliit, sa panlabas na mga kalakal na lumalabas o nawawala mula sa merkado ng seguridad. Sa halip na mag-aalok ng isang pare-parehong "balot ng seguridad" sa lahat, isang katangian ng patakaran sa estado ng produksyon, ang isang maraming mga pakete ng serbisyo ay lalabas sa pamilihan. Ang mga ito ay ibinigay para sa iba't-ibang mga pangangailangan sa seguridad ng iba't-ibang tao, na isinasaalang-alang ang iba't-ibang trabaho, iba't ibang mga pag-uugali sa pagkuha ng panganib, iba't ibang mga pangangailangan para sa siguradong proteksyon, at iba't ibang mga lokasyon sa heograpiya at mga hadlang sa oras.

Pero yaan ay sobrang malayo sa lahat. Bukod sa ibat-iba, ang nilalaman at kalidad ng mga produkto ay mapapahusay, din. Hindi lamang ang paggamot ng mga taga-konsumo sa pamamagitan ng mga empleyado ng mga negosyo sa seguridad ay bumuti agad, ang "hindi-ako-maingat" na saloobin, ang nagkataon at kahit na sobra ang kahayupan, ang kapabayaan at pagkakamali ng kasalukuyang pulisya at mga sistema ng panghukuman ay mawawala sa kalaunan. Yamang ang mga pulis at mga hukom ay dumedepende sa kusang-loob na suporta sa mga kostumer, ang anumang mga kaso ng pag-aalipusta ng mga kostumer, ng kawalang kabuluhan o kawalan ng kakayahan ay maaaring magdulot sa kanila ng kanilang gawain. Dagdag pa, ang kakaibang katangian na ang pag-aayos ng mga pagtatalo sa pagitan ng isang kliyente at kasosyo sa kanyang negosyo ay walang katiyakan na ipinagkatiwala sa paghuhusga sa huli, ay tiyak na mawawala mula sa mga aklat, at ang arbitrasyon ng mga argumento ng mga independiyenteng partido ay magiging pamantayan na inalok ng mga taga-gawa ng seguridad. Ang pinaka-importante, upang maakit at mapapanatili ang mga mamimili ang mga taga-gawa ng naturang mga serbisyo ay kailangang mag-alok ng mga kontrata na magpapahintulot sa mamimili na malaman kung ano ang kanyang binibili at paganahin siya upang taasan ang isang wastong, ibaon sa sariling mga reklamo kung ang aktwal na pagganap ng tagagawa ng seguridad hindi nakatira hanggang sa kontrata. Higit pang mga tiyak na, bukod sa hindi isa-isa ang serbisyo para sa kontrata kung saan ang pagbabayad ay ginawa ng isang mamimili upang maitago ang kanyang sariling mga paghihirap ng eksklusibo ngunit sa halip ay mga kontrata ng sigurado na nangangailangan ng paghatak ng sariling mga panganib sa mga ng iba pang mga tao, salungat sa kasalukuyan istatistika pagsasanay ang mga kontrata pinaka tiyak na hindi na maglaman ng anumang 
sadyang binuo na pamamaraang pamimigay na pinapaboran ang isang grupo ng mga tao sa kapinsalaan ng isa pa. Kung hindi, at kung ang sinuman ay may pakiramdam na ang kontrata na iniaalok sa kanya ay kailangan siyang magbayad para sa mga sigurong pangangailangan at paghihirap ng ibang tao-ang mga kadahilanan ng posibleng kawalan ng seguridad, ay ibig sabihin, na hindi niya napagtanto kung naaangkop sa kanyang sariling kaso-iiwasan lamang niya ang pagpirma ito o hindi ipagpatuloy ang kanyang mga pagbabayad.

Pero kapag ang lahat ng ito ay sinabi, ang tanong ay hindi pwedeng maaaring nasa ibabaw. "Hindi ba ang isang kakumpentesyang sistema ng produksyon ng seguridad ay kinakailangang magka-resulta sa permanenteng panlipunang kontrahan, sa kaguluhan at anarkiya?" Maraming tugon ang maaaring gawin sa tanong na ito. Una, dapat pansinin na ang gayong isang impresyon ay hindi dapat ay alinsunod sa makasaysayang, patotoo na ebidensya. Ang mga sistema ng nakikipagkumpetensyang mga korte ay umiiral sa iba't ibang lugar (hal., Sa sinaunang Ireland o kaya sa panahon ng Liga sa Hanseatic) bago dumating ang modernong bansa ng estado, at hanggang sa alam natin na gumagawa sila nang maayos.[^27] pagkatapos ay mayroong tala ng krimen (krimen sa bawat kabisera), ang pribadong pulis sa tinatawag na Wild West (na hindi naman kasing ligaw ng ilang mga pelikula ay nagpapahiwatig) ay mas matagumpay kaysa sa kasalukuyang pulis na suportado ng estado). [^28] Ang pagliko sa kontemporaryong karanasan at mga halimbawa na, ang milyun-milyon at milyun-milyong pakikipagtulongan sa kontrata ay umiiral kahit na ngayon-ang mga kontrata ng kalakalan at paglalakbay-at tiyak na tila isang pagmamalabis na sabihin, halimbawa, na mayroong higit pang pandaraya, higit na krimen, higit pang paglabag sa kontrata doon kaysa sa mga relasyon sa tahanan. At ito, dapat tandaan, kung wala itong isang malaking monopolistikong taga-gawa ng seguridad at mambabatas. Sa wakas hindi dapat makalimutan na kahit na sa maraming bilang ng mga bansa ang mayroong iba't ibang mga pribadong taga-gawa ng seguridad sa tabi ng estado: mga pribadong imbestigador, sekreta ng sigurado, at mga pribadong arbitasyon. Ang kanilang trabaho tila upang kumpirmahin ang tesis na sila ay higit pa, hindi mas mababa, matagumpay sa paglutas ng mga panlipunang salungatan kaysa sa kanilang mga pampublikong kasamahan.

[^27]: See the literature cited in note 22; also Bruno Leoni, *Freedom and the Law* (Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1961); Joseph Peden, “Property Rights in Celtic Irish Law,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977).

[^28]: See Terry L. Anderson and Peter J. Hill, “The American Experiment in Anarcho-Capitalism: The *Not* So Wild, Wild West,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 1 (1980).

However, this historical evidence is very much subject to dispute, in particular regarding whether any general information can be derived from it. Yet there are systematic reasons, too, why the fear expressed by the question is not well-founded. Paradoxical as it may seem, establishing a competitive system of security producers implies erecting an institutionalized incentive structure to produce an order of law and law-enforcement that embodies the highest possible degree of consensus regarding the question of conflict resolution. Such a structure will tend to generate less rather than more social unrest and conflict than would occur under monopolistic auspices.[^29] In order to understand this paradox, it is necessary to take a closer look at the only typical situation that concerns the skeptic and that allows him to believe in the superior virtue of a monopolistically organized order of security production: when a conflict arises between A and B, both are insured by different companies and the companies cannot come to an immediate agreement regarding the validity of the conflicting claims brought forward by their respective clients. (No problem would exist if such an agreement were reached or if both clients were insured by one and the same company—at least the problem then would not be different in any way from that emerging under a statist monopoly.) Would not such a situation always result in a shoot-out? This is highly unlikely. First, any violent battle between companies would be costly and risky, in particular if these companies had reached a respectable size (which would be important for them to have in order to appear as effective guarantors of security to their prospective clients in the first place). More importantly, under a competitive system with each company dependent on the continuation of voluntary consumer payments, any battle would have to be deliberately supported by each and every client of both companies. If there were only one person who withdrew his payments because he was not convinced a battle was necessary in the particular conflict at hand, there would be immediate economic pressure on the company to look for a peaceful solution to the conflict.[^30] Hence any competitive producer of security would be extremely cautious about engaging in violent measures in order to resolve conflicts. Rather, to the extent that it is peaceful conflict resolution that consumers want, each and every security producer would go to great lengths to provide it to its clients and to establish in advance, for everyone to know, to what arbitration process it would be willing to submit itself and its clients in case of a disagreement over the evaluation of conflicting claims. And as such a scheme could appear to the clients of different firms to be working only if there were agreement among them regarding such arbitrational measures, a system of law governing relations between companies that would be universally acceptable to the clients of all of the competing security producers would naturally evolve. Moreover, the economic pressure to generate rules representing a consensus on how conflicts should be handled is even more farreaching. Under a competitive system, the independent arbitrators who would be entrusted with the task of finding peaceful solutions to conflicts would be dependent on the continued support of the two disputing companies insofar as the companies could and would select different judges if either one of them were sufficiently dissatisfied with the outcome of the arbitration work. Thus, these judges would be under pressure to find solutions to the problems handed over to them that, this time not with respect to the procedural aspects of law but its content, would be acceptable to all of the clients of the firms involved.[^31] Otherwise one or all of the companies might lose customers, thus inducing those firms to turn to different arbitrators the next time they are in need of one.[^32]

[^29]: On the following, see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Eigentum, Anarchie, und Staat* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1986), chap. 5.

[^30]: Contrast this with the state’s policy of engaging in battles without having everyone’s deliberate support because it has the right to tax people; and ask yourself if the risk of war would be lower or higher if one had the right to stop paying taxes as soon as one had the feeling that the states’ handling of foreign affairs was not to one’s liking.

[^31]: And it may be noted here again that norms that incorporate the highest possible degrees of consensus are, of course, those that are presupposed by argumentation and whose acceptance makes consensus on anything at all possible, as indicated above.

[^32]: Again, contrast this with state-employed judges who, because they are paid from taxes and so are relatively independent of consumer satisfaction, can pass judgments that are clearly not acceptable as fair by everyone; and ask yourself if the risk of not finding the truth in a given case would be lower or higher if one had the possibility of exerting economic pressure whenever one had the feeling that a judge who one day might have to adjudicate in one’s own case had not been sufficiently careful in assembling and judging the facts of a case, or simply was an outright crook.

But wouldn’t it be possible under a competitive system for a security producing firm to become an outlaw company—a firm, that is, which, supported by its own clients, started aggressing against others? There is certainly no way to deny that this might be possible, though again it must be emphasized that here one is in the realm of empirical social science and no one could know such a thing with certainty. And yet the tacit implication that the possibility that a security firm could become an outlaw company somehow indicates a severe deficiency in the philosophy and economics of a pure capitalist social order is fallacious.[^33]

[^33]: See on the following in particular Rothbard, *For A New Liberty*, pp. 233ff.

First, it should be recalled that any social system, a statist-socialist order no less than a pure market economy, is dependent for its continued existence on public opinion and that a given state of public opinion at all times delimits what can or cannot occur as well as what is more or less likely to occur. The current state of public opinion in West Germany, for instance, makes it highly unlikely or even impossible that a statist-socialist system of the current Soviet type could be imposed on the West German public. The lack of public support for such a system would doom it to failure and make it collapse. It is even more unlikely that any attempt to impose a Soviet-type order could ever hope to succeed among Americans, given American public opinion. Hence, in order for us to see the problem of outlaw companies correctly, the above question should be phrased as follows: How likely is it that any such event would occur in a given society with its specific state of public opinion? Formulated in this way, it is clear that the answer would have to be different for different societies. For some, characterized by socialist ideas deeply entrenched in the public, there would be a greater likelihood of the reemergence of aggressor companies, and for other societies there would be a much smaller chance of this happening. But then, would the prospect of a competitive system of security production in any given case be better or worse than that of the continuation of a statist system? Let us look, for instance, at the present-day United States. Assume that by a legislative act the state had abolished its right to provide security with tax funds and a competitive system of security production was introduced. Given the state of public opinion, how likely then would it be that outlaw producers would spring up, and what if they did? Evidently, the answer would depend on the reactions of the public to this changed situation. Thus, the first reply to those challenging the idea of a private market for security would have to be: What about you? What would your reaction be? Does your fear of outlaw companies mean that you would then go out and engage in trade with a security producer that aggressed against other people and their property, and would you continue supporting it if it did? Certainly the critic would be much muted by this counterattack. But more important than this is the systematic challenge implied in this personal counterattack. Evidently, the described change in the situation would imply a change in the cost-benefit structure that everyone would face once he had to make his decisions. Before the introduction of a competitive system of security production, it had been legal to participate in and support (state) aggression. Now such an activity would be illegal. Hence, given one’s conscience, which makes each decision appear more or less costly (i.e., more or less in harmony with one’s own principles of correct behavior), support for a firm engaging in the exploitation of people unwilling to deliberately support its actions would be more costly than before. Given this fact, it must be assumed that the number of people (including even those who otherwise would have readily lent their support to the state) who would now spend their money to support a firm committed to honest business would rise wherever this social experiment was tried. In contrast, the number of people still committed to a policy of exploitation—of gaining at the expense of others—would fall. How drastic this effect would be would of course depend on the state of public opinion. In the example at hand—the United States, where the natural theory of property is extremely widespread and accepted as a private ethic, the libertarian philosophy being essentially the ideology on which the country was founded and that led it to the height it reached[^34]—the effect would naturally be particularly pronounced. Accordingly, security producing firms committed to the philosophy of protecting and enforcing libertarian law would attract the greatest bulk of public support and financial assistance. And while it may be true that some people, and among them especially those who have profited from the old order, might continue their support of a policy of aggression, it is very unlikely that they would be sufficient in number and financial strength to succeed in doing so. Rather, the likely outcome would be that the honest companies would develop the strength needed—alone or in a combined effort and supported in this effort by their own voluntary customers—to check any such emergence of outlaw producers and destroy them wherever and whenever they came into existence.[^35]

[^34]: See Bernard Bailyn, *The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); Jackson Turner Main, *The Anti-Federalists: Critics of the Constitution* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1961); Murray N. Rothbard, *Conceived in Liberty* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1975–1979).

[^35]: Naturally, insurance companies would assume a particularly important role in checking the emergence of outlaw companies. Note Morris and Linda Tannehill (*The Market of Liberty*, pp. 110–11):

    > Insurance companies, a very important sector of any totally free economy, would have a special incentive to dissociate themselves from any aggressor and, in addition, to bring all their considerable business influence to bear against him. *Aggressive violence causes value loss*, and the insurance industry would suffer the major cost in most such value losses. An unrestrained aggressor is a walking liability, and no insurance company, however remotely removed from his original aggression, would wish to sustain the risk that he might aggress against one of its own clients next. Besides, aggressors and those who associate with them are more likely to be involved in situations of violence and are, thus, bad insurance risks. An insurance company would probably refuse coverage to such people out of a foresighted desire to minimize any future losses which their aggression might cause. But even if the company were not motivated by such foresight, it would still be forced to rate their premiums up drastically or cancel their coverage altogether in order to avoid carrying the extra risk invoked in their inclination to violence. In a competitive economy, no insurance company could afford to continue covering aggressors and those who had dealings with aggressors and simply pass the cost on to its honest customers; it would soon lose these customers to more reputable firms which could afford to charge less for their insurance coverage.
