## Sa mga Tunay na Pagbibigay-katuwiran sa mga Etika ng Pribadong Ari-arian

Si Ludwig von Mises, sa kanyang obra maestrang *Aksyon ng mga Tao*, ipinakikilala at ipinaliliwanag ang buong katawan ng pang-ekonomiyang teorya bilang ipinahiwatig sa, at mahinuha mula sa, haka-hakang pang-unawa ng isang tao sa kahulugan ng aksyon (idagdag pa ang ilang pangkalahatan, tahasang ipinakilalang pagpapalagay tungkol sa obserbadong katotohanan na kung saan ang aksyon ay nagaganap). Tinatawag niya itong haka-hakang kaalaman ang "nangungusap na katotohanan ng aksyon," at ipinapakita niya kung aling kahulugan ang ibig sabihin ng aksyon mula sa kung aling pang-ekonomiyang teorya na lumabas, hal, ng kahalagahan, katapusan at mga paraan, ng pagpili, kagustuhan, pakinabang, kawalan, at halaga, na dapat isaalang-alang na isang pantulong na kaalaman. Ito ay hindi nanggaling mula sa kahulugan ng mga impresyon kundi mula sa repleksyon (ang isa ay hindi nakikita ang mga aksyon ngunit sa halip ay binibigyang -kahulugan ang tiyak na pisikal na penomena bilang mga aksyon). Higit sa lahat, hindi ito maaaring maging walang-bisa nang kahit anong karanasan kahit ano pa man, sapagkat kahit anong pagtatangka ang nais gawin na ipinalagay na ang pagkakaroon ng aksyon at ang pagkaunawa ng isang aktor sa mga kategorya ng aksyon (nakakaranas ng isang bagay ay, pagkatapos ng lahat, sa sarili ay isang intensyonal na aksyon).

Kaya naman ang pagkakaroon ng ekonomiyang binuong muli bilang, sa huling pagdulog, na nanggaling mula sa isang pantulong na totoong panukala, Maaaring ipahayag ni Mises na ibinigay niya ang isang tunay na pundasyon ng ekonomiya. Tinatawag niya ang isang matatag na ekonomiya na "prakseyolohiya," ang lohika ng aksyon, upang bigyang diin ang katotohanan na ang panukala nito ay tiyak na napatunayan sa pamamagitan ng kabutihan ng hindi mapag-aalinlanganang aksyon-nangungusap na katotohanan ng aksyon at ang pantay na hindi mapag-aalinlanganang mga batas ng lohikal na pangangatuwiran (gaya ng mga batas ng pagkakakilanlan at pagkakasalungatan)--ganap na malaya, yan ay, ng kahit anong uri ng obserbadong pagsusuri (bilang may trabaho, halimbawa, sa pisika). Gayunpaman, bagaman ang kanyang ideya ng prakseyolohiya at ang kanyang pagkakagawa ng isang buong katawan ng prakseyolohikal na kaisipan ang nagluklok sa kanya bilang isa sa mga dakilang tao sa modernong Kanluraning tradisyon ng rasyonalismo sa paghahanap nito para sa tiyak na mga pundasyon, si Mises ay hindi nag-iisip na ang iba pang pag-angkin ng tradisyon na ito ay may magagawang mabuti: ang pag-angkin na mayroon ding mga pundasyon sa usaping etikal. Ayon kay Mises ay may umiiral na hindi tunay na pagbibigay -katuwiran para sa etikal na mga panukala sa parehong kahulugan bilang may umiiral na isa para sa pang-ekonomiyang mga panukala. Ang ekonomiya ay maaaring ipaalam sa atin o kung hindi man na ang tiyak na paraan ay angkop para sa pagsasakatuparan tungkol sa tiyak na katapusan, gayunpaman o kung hindi ang katapusan ay maaaring ituring bilang hindi lamang maaaring ipasya sa pamamagitan ng ekonomiya o ng anumang iba pang mga agham. Sa bagay na iyan ay walang pagbibigay-katuwiran para sa pagpili ng isa sa halip na iba pang dulo. Sa huling pagdulog, kung aling dulo ang mapili ay hindi-makatuwiran mula sa isang siyentipikong pananaw at ay isang bagay ng pansariling kapritso, ay hindi kaya ng anumang pagbibigay-katuwiran sa kabila ng katotohanang nagustuhan lamang.

Maraming mga libertaryan ang sumunod kay Mises sa puntong ito. Katulad ni Mises, tinalikuran nila ang ideya ng isang rasyonal na pundasyon ng etika. Katulad ng ginawa niya, gumawa sila hangga't maaari mula sa pang-ekonomiyang panukala na ang etika ng pribadong ari-arian ng libertaryan ay magbubunga ng mataas na pangkalahatang pamantayan ng pamumuhay kaysa alinmang iba pa; na karamihan sa mga tao ay talagang ginusto ang mas mataas kaysa mas mababang mga pamantayan ng pamumuhay; at kaya naman, na ang libertaryanismo ay dapat patunayan ng may lubos na pagkilala. Ngunit sa huli, tulad ng pagkaalam ni Mises, ang katulad na pagsasaalang-alang ay maaari lamang mahikayat ang isang tao ng libertaryanismo na tinanggap na ang hangarin ng mga "utilitaryan" na pagpapalawig ng pangkalahatang kayamanan. Para sa mga tao na hindi nagbahagi ng hangarin na ito, wala silang maimplwensiyang lakas para sa lahat. Kaya naman, sa pinal na pagsusuri, ang libertaryanismo ay batay sa walang anuman kundi isang pagkakataon na gawa ng paniniwala.

Sa mga sumusunod ay binalangkas ko ang isang argumento na nagpapakita kung bakit ang posisyon na ito ay hindi kanais-nais, at kung papaanong ang mahalagang etika ng pribadong ari-arian ng Lockean ng libertarianismo ay maaaring talagang makatuwiran. Sa katunayan, ang argumentong ito ay sinusuportahan ang posisyon ng mga likas na karapatan ng libertaryanismo na itinataguyod ng iba pang punong tagapag-isip ng makabagong kilusan ng libertaryan, si Murray N. Rothbard--higit sa lahat sa kanyang *Mga Etika ng Kalayaan*. Gayunpaman, ang argumentong pinatatatag ang tunay na pagbibigay-katuwiran ng pribadong ari-arian ay kakaiba mula sa isang kadalasang inaalok sa pamamagitan ng tradisyon ng likas na karapatan. Sa halip na ang tradisyon na ito, ito ay kay Mises, at ang kanyang ideya ng prakseyolohiya at ang prakseyolohikal na mga katibayan, na nagbibigay ng mga modelo.

Ipinakita ko na ang etika ng pribadong ari-arian ng libertaryan ay maaaring makatuwiranan sa pag-a-argumento, dahil ito ay ang prakseyolohikal na pagpapalagay ng argumentasyon tulad nito; at anumang paglilihis, ng hindi libertaryang etikal na panukala ay maaaring ipinapakita sa paglabag ng ipinakitang kagustuhan nito. Ang gayong panukala ay maaaring gawin, siyempre, ngunit ang laman ng panukalang ito ay sinalungat ang etika kung saan ang isa ay nagpakita ng kagustuhan sa pamamagitan ng kabutihan ng sariling gawang panukala, hal, sa pamamagitan ng pagkilos ng pakikipag=argumento tulad nito. Halimbawa, maaaring sabihin ng isa na "ang tao ay at laging dapat na *walang malasakit* patungo sa paggawa ng mga bagay," ngunit ang panukala na ito ay tatanggihan ng pagkagawa ng paggawa ng panukala, na sa katunayan ay nagpapakita ng subyektibong *kagustuhan* (ng pagsasabi nito sa halip na sabihin ang kahit na ano o hindi sinasabi ang anumang bagay). Likewise, nonlibertarian ethical proposals are falsified by the reality of actually proposing them.

To reach this conclusion and to properly understand its importance and logical force, two insights are essential.

First, it must be noted that the question of what is just or unjust—or for that matter the even more general question of what is a valid proposition and what is not—only arises insofar as I am, and others are, capable of propositional exchanges, i.e., of argumentation. The question does not arise vis-à-vis a stone or fish because they are incapable of engaging in such exchanges and of producing validity claiming propositions. Yet if this is so—and one cannot deny that it is without contradicting oneself, as one cannot argue the case that one cannot argue—then any ethical proposal as well as any other proposition must be assumed to claim that it is capable of being validated by propositional or argumentative means. (Mises, too, insofar as he formulates economic propositions, must be assumed to claim this.) In fact, in producing any proposition, overtly or as an internal thought, one demonstrates one’s preference for the willingness to rely on argumentative means in convincing oneself or others of something. There is then, trivially enough, no way of justifying anything unless it is a justification by means of propositional exchanges and arguments. However, then it must be considered the ultimate defeat for an ethical proposal if one can demonstrate that its content is logically incompatible with the proponent’s claim that its validity be ascertainable by argumentative means. To demonstrate any such incompatibility would amount to an impossibility proof, and such proof would constitute the most deadly defeat possible in the realm of intellectual inquiry.

Second, it must be noted that argumentation does not consist of free-floating propositions but is a form of action requiring the employment of scarce means; and that the means which a person demonstrates as preferring by engaging in propositional exchanges are those of private property. For one thing, no one could possibly propose anything, and no one could become convinced of any proposition by argumentative means, if a person’s right to make exclusive use of his physical body were not already presupposed. It is this recognition of each other’s mutually exclusive control over one’s own body which explains the distinctive character of propositional exchanges that, while one may disagree about what has been said, it is still possible to agree at least on the fact that there is disagreement. It is also obvious that such a property right to one’s own body must be said to be justified a priori, for anyone who tried to justify any norm whatsoever would already have to presuppose the exclusive right of control over his body as a valid norm simply in order to say, “I propose such and such.” Anyone disputing such a right would become caught up in a practical contradiction since arguing so would already imply acceptance of the very norm which he was disputing.

Furthermore, it would be equally impossible to sustain argumentation for any length of time and rely on the propositional force of one’s arguments if one were not allowed to appropriate in addition to one’s body other scarce means through homesteading action (by putting them to use before somebody else does), and if such means and the rights of exclusive control regarding them were not defined in objective physical terms. For if no one had the right to control anything at all except his own body, then we would all cease to exist and the problem of justifying norms simply would not exist. Thus, by virtue of the fact of being alive, property rights to other things must be presupposed to be valid. No one who is alive could argue otherwise.

Moreover, if a person did not acquire the right of exclusive control over such goods by homesteading action, i.e., by establishing an objective link between a particular person and a particular scarce resource before anybody else had done so, but if instead late-comers were assumed to have ownership claims to goods, then no one would be allowed to do anything with anything as one would have to have all of the late-comers’ consent prior to ever doing what one wanted to do. Neither we, nor our forefathers, nor our progeny could, do, or will survive if one were to follow this rule. In order for any person—past, present, or future—to argue anything it must be possible to survive then and now, and in order to do just this property rights cannot be conceived of as being timeless and nonspecific regarding the number of people involved. Rather, property rights must be thought of as originating as a result of specific individuals acting at definite points in time. Otherwise, it would be impossible for anyone to first say anything at a definite point in time and for someone else to be able to reply. Simply saying that the first-user-first-owner rule of libertarianism can be ignored or is unjustified implies a contradiction, for one’s being able to say so must presuppose one’s existence as an independent decision-making unit at a given point in time.

Finally, acting and proposition-making would also be impossible if the things acquired through homesteading were not defined in objective, physical terms (and if correspondingly, aggression were not defined as an invasion of the physical integrity of another person’s property), but in terms of subjective values and evaluations. While every person can have control over whether or not his actions cause the physical integrity of something to change, control over whether or not one’s actions affect the value of someone’s property rests with other people and their evaluations. One would have to interrogate and come to an agreement with the entire world population to make sure that one’s planned actions would not change another person’s evaluations regarding his property. Surely, everyone would be long dead before this was accomplished. Moreover, the idea that property values should be protected is argumentatively indefensible, for even in order to argue so it must be presupposed that actions must be permitted prior to any actual agreement. (If they were not one could not even make this proposition.) If they are permitted, however, this is only possible because of objective borders of property, i.e., borders which every person can recognize as such on his own without having to agree first with anyone else with respect to one’s system of values and evaluations.

By being alive and formulating any proposition, one demonstrates that any ethic except the libertarian private properly ethic is invalid. If this were not so and late-comers had to have legitimate claims to things or things owned were defined in subjective terms, no one could possibly survive as a physically independent decision-making unit at any given point in time. Hence, no one could ever raise any validityclaiming proposition.

This concludes my a priori justification of the private property ethic. A few comments regarding a topic already touched upon earlier, the relationship of this “praxeological” proof of libertarianism to the utilitarian and to the natural rights position, shall complete the discussion.

As regards the utilitarian position, the proof contains its ultimate refutation. It demonstrates that simply in order to propose the utilitarian position, exclusive rights of control over one’s body and one’s homesteaded goods already must be presupposed as valid. More specifically, as regards the consequentialist aspect of libertarianism, the proof shows its praxeological impossibility: the assignment of rights of exclusive control cannot be dependent on certain outcomes. One could never act and propose anything unless private property rights existed prior to a later outcome. A consequentialist ethic is a praxeological absurdity. Any ethic must instead be “aprioristic” or instantaneous in order to make it possible that one can act here and now and propose this or that rather than having to suspend acting until later. Nobody advocating a wait-for-the-outcome ethic would be around to say anything if he took his own advice seriously. Also, to the extent that utilitarian proponents are still around, they demonstrate through their actions that their consequentialist doctrine is and must be regarded as false. Acting and proposition-making require private property rights now and cannot wait for them to be assigned only later.

As regards the natural rights position, the praxeological proof, generally supportive as it is of the former’s position concerning the possibility of a rational ethic and in full agreement with the conclusions reached within this tradition (specifically, by Murray N. Rothbard), has at least two distinctive advantages. For one thing, it has been a common quarrel with the natural rights position, even on the part of otherwise sympathetic observers, that the concept of human nature is far too diffuse to allow the derivation of a determinate set of rules of conduct. The praxeological approach solves this problem by recognizing that it is not the wider concept of human nature but the narrower one of propositional exchanges and argumentation which must serve as the starting point in deriving an ethic. Moreover, there exists an a priori justification for this choice insofar as the problem of true and false, of right and wrong, does not arise independent of propositional exchanges. No one, then, could possibly challenge such a starting point without contradiction. Finally, it is argumentation which requires the recognition of private property, so an argumentative challenge of the validity of the private property ethic is praxeologically impossible.

Second, there is the logical gap between “is-” and “ought-statements” which natural rights proponents have failed to bridge successfully—except for advancing some general critical remarks regarding the ultimate validity of the fact-value dichotomy. Here the praxeological proof of libertarianism has the advantage of offering a completely value-free justification of private property. It remains entirely in the realm of is-statements and never tries to derive an “ought” from an “is.” The structure of the argument is this: (a) justification is propositional justification—a priori true is-statement; (b) argumentation presupposes property in one’s body and the homesteading principle—a priori true is-statement; and (c) then, no deviation from this ethic can be argumentatively justified—a priori true is-statement. The proof also offers a key to an understanding of the nature of the fact-value dichotomy: Ought-statements cannot be derived from isstatements. They belong to different logical realms. It is also clear, however, that one cannot even state that there are facts and values if no propositional exchanges exist, and that this practice of propositional exchanges in turn presupposes the acceptance of the private property ethic as valid. In other words, cognition and truth-seeking as such have a normative foundation, and the normative foundation on which cognition and truth rest is the recognition of private property rights.