## Ang Ekonomiya at Sosyolohiya ng Pagbubuwis

Bilang ang titulo ay ipinapahiwatig ang kabanata, meron akong sariling dalawang mga layunin. Una, nais kong ipaliwanag ang pangkalahatang epekto ng pagbubuwis sa ekonomiya. Ang bahaging ito ng kabanata ay kumakatawan ng pagsusuri ng isang praksiyolohika sa pagbubuwis at bilang gayon din ang hindi nararapat na ekspektasyon upang hindi mapunta sa kabila ng kung anung nasabi na ng ibang mga ekonomista.

Ang karamihan ng orihinal ay maaaring makita sa pangalawang parte, kung saan susubukan kong sagutin ang katanungan na: bakit mayroong pagbubuwis; at bakit laging mayroong mga ito? Ang pagsagot sa ganyang mga katanungan ay hindi tungkulin ng pang-ekonomiyang teyorya ngunit sa praksiyolohika na inalam at napilitan ang sosyolohikal o mga interpretasyon ng historikal at mga pagbubuo muli, at mula sa umpisa na mas maraming lugar para sa ispekulasyon sa larangang ito ng itelektwal na umiiral ng pagtatanong.

## #

Para sabihing walang bago sa inilagay tungkol sa epekto ng ekonomiya ng pagbubuwis ay hindi sinasabi na kung ano ang *is* hindi maaaring maibalita sa marami. Sa katunayan, matapos suriin ang ilang popular na mga aklat ng pang-ekonomiya ay wari ko na kung anong dapat na sabihin ay ang pinakang mga balita ngayon sa mga ekonomista at mga estudyante ng ekonomiya. Sa gayon tulad ng mga tekstong pinagkasunduan kasama ang epekto sa lahat ng pagbubuwis sa ekonomiya, sa kabila ng isang ganap na dekriptibong presentasyon ng maraming mga pakanang buwis at ang kanilang makasaysayang pagbuo[^1], sila ay halos tahimik lahat sa katanungan na kung ano ang epekto ng pangkalahatang pagbubuwis. Bukod pa rito, kung anung diskusyon nila sa problema ng saklaw ng buwis ng mga teksto ay dapat sabihin na ang epekto ng ekonomiya ng partikular na pagbubuo ng pagbubuwis ay depekto na walang pagbabago.

Gayun pa man, ang estadong mga suliranin ay sumasalamin lamang sa isang proseso ng intelektwal ng pagkabulok. Noong 150 na mga taong nakalipas halos lahat ng bagay na dapat naiintindihan ngayon tungkol sa pagbubuwis sa ekonomiya ay wasto at nakakakumbinsing pagkakasaad ng sa gayon isang prominenteng pigura sa kasaysayan ng ekonomiya bilang Jean Baptiste Say sa kanyang * Kasasayan sa Pulitika ng Ekonomiya*.

Ang kaibahan sa ngayong manunulat ng araling aklat, na kung sino ang natalaga sa diskusyon ng pagbubuwis sa mga lugar na di makatwiran sa loob ng kabuuan ng arkitektura ng kanilang mga libro, mula sa umpisa itinama ni Say ang paglolokasyon ng hindi pangkaraniwan sa ilalim ng pangkalahatan tungo sa " Pagkonsumo ng Kayamanan"

Pagkatapos ay kinilala niya nang walang alinlangan at ipinaliwanag ang pagbubuwis bilang isang pag atake at pagkuha ng kaparusahan at produksyon ng ari-arian, kung saan humahantong sa kinakailangan sa isang pagbabawas sa pagbubuo ng yaman na gayong ang ari-arian at sa isang pagbababa ng pangkalahatang pamantayan ng pamumuhay.

Mga Tala na sinasabi:

> Ito ay isang ginagawang kahangalan upang magkunwari, na ang pag-aambag ng pagbubuwis sa pambansang yaman, sa pamamagitan ng nagpapalaki ng bahagi ng pag-ani, at pagyamanin ang nasyon sa pamamagitan ng pagkokonsumo ng bahagi ng kayamanan.[^2]
> 
> Ang pagbubuwis ay paglilipat ng isang bahagi ng pamabansang mga produkto mula sa mga kamay ng mga indibidwal para sa gobyerno, para sa layunin ng pagpupulong ng pampublikong pagkonsumo o paggasta. Kahit na anung denominasyon ang nagdadala, kahit buwis, kontribusyon, tungkulin, pag-excise, asal, tulong na salapi, kaloob, o libreng regalo, ito ay halos isang pagpapasan ng pinataw sa bawat indibidwal, alinman sa isang hiwalay o katangian ng korporasyon, sa pamamagitan ng naghaharing kapangyarihan sa panahong iyon, para sa layunin ng pagtutustos ng pagkonsumo ay maaaring mag-isip ng tama para sa kanilang gastusin; sa madaling salita, isang buwis, ang literal na kahulugan.[^3]

Dahil sa mga ideyang pangunahin ay tila nakalimutan na, o mukhang hindi na kailanman lumilitaw ngayon, ipaalam sa akin, bilang una kong tungkulin, magpakita mulia ng akawnt ng isang praksiyolohika at eksplenasyon para sa sentral na argumento ni Say at ang pagkatotoo nito, at at sa gayon mapabulaanan ang ilang popular na 'counterarguments' ng nagpapanggap na ipakita na ang pagbubuwis ay kailangang hindi harangin ang pagbubuo ng ari-arian at kayamanan. Dahil sa pangkalahatang eksplenasyon dito, papatunayan ko ang kamalian ng pangunahing lohikal na kalagayan ng araling aklat ng saklaw ng buwis.

Ang pagbubuwis na yan-pangunahin at higit sa lahat-ay at dapat na maintindihan bilang isang paraan ng pagsira ng ari-arian at yaman-pagsunod sa pagbubuo mula sa isang simpleng pagsusuri ng lohikal na kahulugan ng pagbubuwis.

Isang pagpipilit ang pagbubuwis, hindi kontraktwal na paglilipat ng tiyak na mga ari-ariang pisikal (karamihan sa panahong ito, ngunit hindi eksklusibo sa pera), at ang pagpapahalaga na nakapaloob sa kanila, mula sa isang tao o grupo ng mga tao kung sino ang humahawak sa mga ari-arian at na maaaring nagmula ang isang kita mula sa mga humahawak sa kanila, sa iba, kung sino ang nagmamay-ari sa kanila at nakakakuha ng kita mula sa paggawa nito ngayon. Paano napunta ang mga ari-arian sa mga kamay ng kanilang orihinal na nagmamay-ari? Ang desisyong ito na kinalabasan ng ibang nakararaang akto ng pagbubuwis, ililista lamang ang mga ari-arian na maaaring mabuwisan na hindi pa nauubos o kung kaninong halaga ang hindi pa nauubos sa pamamagitan ng mga akto sa pagkonsumo (ang isang taga-ipon ng buwis ay hindi inaalis ang isa pang basura ng tao bagkus ito ay mahalagang mga ari-arian!), tatlo o talong mga posibilidad na umiiral lamang: Sila ay dumating ng iisa ang pag-aari alinman sa pagkakaroon ng tiyak na bigay na kalakal ng kalikasan bilang di sapat ito at pagkakaroon ng aktibong pagdala sa kanila sa isang pag-aari bago makita ng kahit na sino at nagawa ito; sa pamamagitan ng paggawa ng mga ito na sa pamamagitan ng paggawa ng isang bagay sa nakaraang paglaan ng mga kalakal; o sa pamamagitan ng pagboboluntaryo, pagkuha ng kontraktwal mula sa isang nakaraang tagapaglaan o tagalikha. Sa pamamagitan lamang ng mga tipong ito ng mga aktibidades ay iisa ang may kakayahang makatamo at pataasin ang kahalagahan-at dahil dito maaaring pagbuwisin-ang mga ari-arian. Mga gawain ng orihinal na paglalaan ay ginagawang isang bagay na maaaring wala ni isang may nakaraang mapansin bilang isang posibleng pinagmumulan ng kinikita sa isang nagbibigay ng kinikita sa pagbibigay ng ari-arian; ang mga gawain ng produksyon ay sa pamamagitang ng kanilang tunay na likas na layunin ng transpormasyon ng isang hindi gaanong mas mahalagang ari-arian sa pamamagitan ng isang mas mahalagang isa; at sa bawat kontraktwal ng pangangalakal ay alalahanin ang pagbabago at pag-redirect ng partikular ng mga ari-arian mula sa mga kamay ng mga nagpapahalaga ng kanilang pagmamay-ari na mas mababa ang mas nagpapahala sa kanila.

Mula rito sa mga sumusunod na kahit anong anyo ng pagbubuwis ay nangangahulugan ng isang pagbabawas ng kinikita ng isang tao na inaasahang matatanggap mula sa orihinal na paglalaan, mula sa produksyon, o mula sa pangongontrata. Dahil sa mga aktibidades na ito ay nangangailangan ng trabaho na nangangahulugang kakaunti-hindi bababa sa panahon at ang paggamit ng isang katawan-kung saan maaaring ginamit para sa pagkokonsumo at/o mga oras na malaya, ang halaga ng oportunidad ay kanilang ginagampanan ang paglaki nito. Ang paggamit ng pagpupuwang na paglalaan, paggawa, at pangongontrata ay nabawasan, at ang pagpupuwang ng paggamit ng pagkonsumo at ng mga oras na malaya ay nadadagdagan. Alinsunod nito, maaaring magkaroon ng pagkahilig sa paglipat sa dating mga tungkulin at sa mga huli.[^4]

Kaya naman, sa pamamagitan ng pagpilit na paglilipat ng mahahalaga, na hindi naubos ang mga ari-arian mula sa kanilang mga tagagawa (sa mas malawak na kahulugan ng termino kasama ang mga tagapaglaan at mga nangongontrata) sa mga taong hindi ginawa ang mga ito, binabawasan ng pabubuwis ang tagagawa ng kinikita nila ngayon at ang kanilang pagkokonsumo ng pangkasalukuyan sa posibleng lebel nito. Moreover, it reduces the present incentive for future production of valuable assets and thereby also lowers future income and the future level of available consumption. Taxation is not just a punishment of consumption without any effect on productive efforts; it is also an assault on production as the only means of providing for and possibly increasing future income and consumption expenditure. By lowering the present value associated with future-directed, value-productive efforts, taxation raises the effective rate of time preference, i.e., the rate of originary interest and, accordingly, leads to a shortening of the period of production and provision and so exerts an inexorable influence of pushing mankind into the direction of an existence of living from hand to mouth. Just increase taxation enough, and you will have mankind reduced to the level of barbaric animal beasts.

Straightforward as such reasoning may seem, there are a number of popular objections raised against it. For instance, from the side of economists who falsely conceive of economics as an empirical science that produces nothing but hypothetical explanations which invariably must be tested against empirical evidence in order to be validated (analogous to the situation in the natural sciences), the following argument is frequently heard: Empirically, it has been observed repeatedly that a rise in the level of taxation was actually accompanied by a rise (not a fall) in GNP or other measures of productive output; hence, the above reasoning, however plausible, must be considered empirically invalid. In fact, some empiricists of this sort go even further and make the stronger claim that taxation actually helps increase the standard of living as evidenced by the fact that some countries with once low standards of living and low levels of taxation now enjoy a much greater wealth with much higher taxes.

Both objections are simply confused. Experience cannot beat logic, and interpretations of observational evidence which are not in line with the laws of logical reasoning are no refutation of these but the sign of a muddled mind (or would one accept someone’s observational report that he had seen a bird that was red and non-red all over at the same time as a refutation of the law of contradiction rather than the pronouncement of an idiot?).

As regards the stronger thesis, it is nothing but a beautiful illustration of the ever so attractive *post hoc ergo propter hoc* fallacy. From the fact that the correlated events of high taxation and wealth were to be observed later than those of low taxation and wealth it is inferred that increased taxation increases wealth. Yet to reason in this way is about as convincing as the argument—justly ridiculed by Say—that one can observe rich men consuming more than poor ones; therefore, their high level of consumption must be responsible for the fact that they are rich.[^5] Just as it follows from the meaning of consumption that this is impossible and that, on the contrary, the rich are not rich because of their high level of consumption but because they previously abstained from consumption and engaged instead in value-productive actions, so it follows from the meaning of taxation that mankind cannot have prospered because of higher levels of taxation but despite such a fact.

The weaker thesis—that experience would at least disprove any claim of a relationship between taxation and productive output that was negative by necessity—is also off the mark. The praxeological reasoning presented above does not at all rule out what empiricist economists falsely interpret as a refutation. In this earlier discussion the conclusion had been reached that the effect of taxation is a relative reduction in the production of valuable assets—a reduction, that is, as compared with the level of output that would have been produced had there been no taxation at all or had the level of taxation not been raised. Nothing was said or implied with respect to the absolute level of the output of valuable assets. As a matter of fact, absolute growth of GNP, for instance, is not only compatible with our earlier praxeological analysis, but can even be seen as a perfectly normal phenomenon to the extent that advances in productivity are possible and actually take place. If it has become possible through improvements in the technology of production to produce a higher output with an identical input (in terms of cost), or a physically identical output with a reduced input, then the coincidence of increased taxation and an increased output of valuable assets is anything but surprising. However, this does not in the least affect the validity of what has been stated about relative impoverishment resulting from taxation. With a given state of technological knowledge, though it may change over time, and taxation being what it is (a punishment of value-productive efforts), the level of productive output must be lower than the one that could have been attained with the same knowledge and no or lower taxation. Statistical studies here are entirely beside the point: they can neither help strengthen it, nor can they ever be used to weaken it.

Another theoretical objection which enjoys some popularity is that imposing or raising taxes leads to a reduction of income derived from the assets taxed; that this reduction raises the marginal utility of such assets as compared to what can be derived from other forms of activity; and thus, instead of lowering it, taxation actually helps increase the tendency to engage in production. For the usual case of taxing money assets this is to say that taxes reduce monetary income which raises the marginal utility of money, and this in turn increases the incentive to attain monetary returns. This argument, to be sure, is perfectly true as far as it goes. However, it is a misconception to believe that it does anything to invalidate the relative impoverishment thesis that I have advanced. First of all, in order to keep the record straight it should be noted that even if it were true—as the just presented argument seems to suggest, albeit falsely as we will see—that increased taxation does not lead to a relatively lower output of valuable assets produced since it spurs a proportional increase in workaholism, it is still the case that the income of value-productive individuals has fallen. Even if they produce the same output as previously, they can only do so if they expend more labor now than before. Since any additional labor expenditure implies forgone leisure or consumption (leisure or consumption which they otherwise could have enjoyed along with the same output of valuable assets), their overall standard of living must be lower.[^6]

It now becomes apparent why the assumption that taxation can leave the productive output of valuable assets unaffected and exclusively cripple consumption is fatally flawed. If taxation reduces one’s income (which includes that derived from present consumption and leisure), and given the universal fact of time preference, that is, that human actors invariably prefer present goods over future goods (that they cannot do without continuous consumption and can engage in lengthier, more roundabout methods of production only if a provision in the form of consumption goods has been made for the corresponding waiting period), then it necessarily follows that a person’s effective rate of time preference must have been raised through this very act (the disutility of waiting must have increased), and that he will have to shorten the length of the structure of production as compared to the one that he otherwise would have chosen. Accordingly, his output of valuable assets available at future dates will have to be lower than would be the case otherwise. If with lower or no taxation his income had been higher and his time preference schedule being given (whatever it happens to be at any particular point in time), he would have invested in lengthier production processes. As a consequence, his output of valuable future assets would have been relatively greater.[^7]

The error in the thesis that taxation can have a neutral effect on production lies in the fact that time preference is not taken into account. The argument presently under scrutiny is quite correct in pointing out that taxation implies a twofold signal: on the one hand the substitution effect working in favor of consumption and leisure and against work; and on the other hand the income effect of raising the marginal utility of the taxed asset. However, it is false to interpret this simplistically as a mixed bag of contradictory signals—one in favor of and one against work—so that one can then state nothing of a categorical nature regarding the effects of taxation on production, and the question of whether or not taxation provides for a lower or a higher output of valuable assets must be conceived of as an entirely empirical one.[^8] For in fact, the signal of taxation is not contradictory at all once it has been recognized that it is being sent to persons whose actions are invariably constrained by time preference. For such actors there exists not only the alternative between work and no work at all but also one between producing a valuable asset in more or less time-consuming ways. Invariably, they must also choose between obtaining an asset quickly and directly, with little waiting time involved, but at the price of having to resort to less efficient methods of production (the famous fisherman who decides to use his bare hands to catch fish in order to obtain it more quickly than by going through more roundabout methods of production), or obtaining it through more productive methods but then having to wait longer for them to bear fruit (the fisherman who, lured by higher future returns, decides to endure a longer waiting period and first builds a net). However, given these choices, the message of taxation is completely unambiguous and unequivocal, and there can no longer be any question that the substitution effect must be thought of as systematically dominating any income effect: If there is not only the option of having something or not having it but also of having less of something sooner or more of it later, the double message sent through taxation is easily integrated and translated into one: reduce the waiting time; shorten the roundabout methods of production! By doing so, valuable assets will be obtained earlier—in line with their increased marginal utility. Simultaneously, in shortening the waiting period, more room will be given for leisure—in line with its increased marginal utility. By reducing the length of roundabout methods of production the two seemingly contradictory signals stemming from taxation are simultaneously accounted for. Contrary to any claim of a systematically “neutral” effect of taxation on production, the consequence of any such shortening of roundabout methods of production is a lower output produced. The price that invariably must be paid for taxation, and for every increase in taxation, is a coercively lowered productivity that in turn reduces the standard of living in terms of valuable assets provided for future consumption. Every act of taxation necessarily exerts a push away from more highly capitalized, more productive production processes in the direction of a hand-to-mouth-existence.

[^1]: Exclusively descriptive analyses of taxation are given, for instance, by Paul Samuelson, *Economics*, 10th ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), chap. 9; Roger L. Miller, *Economics Today*, 6th ed. (New York: Harper and Row, 1988), chap. 6.

[^2]: Jean Baptiste Say, *A Treatise on Political Economy* (New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1964), pp. 446–47.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 446; on Say’s economic analysis of taxation see also Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (Fall, 1981), esp. pp. 551–54.

[^4]: See on this also Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), chap. 12.8; idem, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 4, 1–3.

[^5]: See Say, A Treatise on Political Economy, p. 448.

[^6]: See on this point also Rothbard, *Power and Market*, pp. 95f.

[^7]: One might object here that the tax receipts will come into someone’s hands—those of government officials or of governmental transfer-paymentrecipients—and that their increased income, resulting in a lower effective time preference rate for them, may offset the increase in this rate on the taxpayers’ side and hence leave the overall rate and the structure of production unchanged. Such reasoning, however, is categorically flawed: For one thing, insofar as government expenditure is concerned, it cannot be regarded as investment at all. Rather, it is consumption, and consumption alone. For, as Rothbard has explained,

> [i]n any sort of division-of-labor economy, capital goods are built, not for their own sake by the investor, but in order to use them to produce lower-order and eventually consumers’ goods. In short, a characteristic of an investment expenditure is that the good in question is not being used to fulfill the needs of the investor, but of someone else—the consumer. Yet, when government confiscates resources from the private market economy, it is precisely defying the wishes of the consumers; when government invests in any good, it does so to serve the whims of government officials, not the desires of consumers. (*Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 816–17)

Thus, government expenditure, by definition, cannot be conceived of as lengthening the production structure and hence as counterbalancing the taxpayers’ raised time preference rate.—On the other hand,

> as for the *transfer* expenditures made by the government (including the salaries of bureaucrats and subsidies to privileged groups), it is true that some of this will be saved and invested. These investments, however, will not represent the voluntary desires of consumers, but rather investments in fields of production *not* desired by the *producing* consumers…. Once let the tax be eliminated, and … the new investments called forth by the demands of the specially privileged will turn out to be *malinvestments*. (*Power and Market*, p. 98)

Consequently, transfer expenditures also cannot be conceived of as compensating for the fact that taxpayers shorten the length of the production structure. All such expenditures can do is to lengthen the structure of mal-production. “At any rate” concludes Rothbard,

> the amount consumed by the government insures that the effect of income taxation will be to raise time-preference ratios and to reduce saving and investment. (Ibid., p. 98)

[^8]: See for such—irrelevant—empirical studies regarding the relative importance of income vs. substitution effects George F. Break, “The Incidence and Economic Effects of Taxation,” in *The Economics of Public Finance* (Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1974), pp. 180ff.; A.B. Atkinson and Joseph E. Stiglitz, *Lectures on Public Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1980), pp. 48ff.; Stiglitz, *Economics of the Public Sector* (New York: Norton, 1986), p. 372.