### Ang positibong Ekonomiya ng Fiduciary Media: Balanse ng Pera, Piresyo, Pagsasaayos, Pagtitipid, at Pamumuhunan

Mula sa likas na katangian na fiduciary media—bilang mga titulo ng hindi mabilang na dami ng pag-aaring pera (ginto), mga titulo ng pera na sakop ang ibapang mga bagay maliban sa pera, o malinaw na palsipikadong pera—tila nais nito na sundan na ang fractianal reserve banking ay hindi maaring maka-apekto sa kahit anong bagay subali't sa isang patuloy ang pagyamanan at ang muling pamimigay ng kita. Gaya ng pagkakatuklas sa mga pamilit na pera na nagpapaalon-alon mula sa naglabas na banko at mga kliente nito na umuutang sa labas sa pamamagaitan ng kabuhayan, at sa gayon sunod-sunod na itataas ang piresyo ng mas maraming mga kalakal, ang tunay na kayamanan (ari-arian) ay inilipat at ipinamigay sa tulong ng nagbigay na banko at ng una at maagang mga tatanggap at magbebenta ng pera na ito, at sa mga gagasto ng mga ito ng huli o hindi nakatangap o nakapagbenta niyo. Ang mga paliwanag ng Rothbord,

> ang unang tumanggap ng mga bagong pera ay nakakuha ng pinakamarami, ang sumunod naman ay nakakuha ng bahagyang mas mababa, atbp., hanggang sa umabot sa kalagitnaan, at pagkatapos ang bawat tatanggap ay nawawala ng higit at higit pa habang siya ay naghihintay para sa mga bagong pera. Para sa mga unang indibidwal na nagbebenta na pumapailanglang ang piresyo habang nananatili ang piresyo ng bilihin na halos pareho parin; pero maya-maya, ang piresyo ng bilihin ay tumaas habang ang pangbentang piresyo ay hindi nabago.[^28]

Ayon sa Selgin at white, gayunpaman, ang fiduciary media ay maaarin magawa ang mas higit pa. Sa halip na muling ipamahagi ang umiiral na ari-arian, ang isyu ng fiduciary media ay maaari, sa ilalim ng ilang mga kondisyon, humantong sa isang pagtaas ng mga tunay na yaman (ari-arian). Naipasa na natin ang mga ito na nagsasaad na "ang binipisyo na naipon sa mga humihiram sa banko na nagnanais sa isang mas sapat na suplay na nasa pagitan ng pautang, at sa lahat ng nakipagtulungan sa ekonomiya para sa mas malaking stock ng mga gamitan sa kapital." Tunay na pinigilan nila nag paglalagay nito, ngunit kung ano ang sinabi nila ay na, sa ilalim ng mga partikular na kalagayan, ang pagtaas ng mga tittulo sa isang hindi nagbabagong pundo sa mga kalakal kahit paano ay napalago o napigilang ang paglubog ng pundo.

Kailan at paano magagawa ang gayong himala? Ayon sa Selgin at White, (ang mga hindi inaasahang) pagbabago sa pangangailangan sa pera ay humantong sa "pangsamantala" o maiksing kawalang ng katumpakan na kinasasangkutan ng lubhang seryosong misallocation ng mga pagkukunan"—na nga, *malibang kung* ang mga pagbabagong ito ay tinatanggap ng mga praksiyonal na gawi ng reserbang pagbabangko. Isinulat nila:

> Sa katagalan, ang mga tinuturing na prisyo ay aayusin upang ihambing ang pagtutustos at pangangailangan para sa pagbalanse ng mga pera, ano naman ang tinuturing na dami ng pera. Hindi nito sinunod, gayonpaman, ang bawat isang *pagbabago* sa mga pangtutustos o pangangailangan para sa pera ay hahantong *ng sabay-sabay* sa isang bagong pag-baluktot ng balanse, dahil ang kahilingan para sa pagsasaayos ng piresyo ay nangangailangan ng oras. Kumukuha sila ng oras dahil hindi lahat ng mga ahente ay agad at lubos na nakaaaman ng mga pagbabago ng nakalaang pera o pangangailangan ng pera at dahil ang ilang mga prisyo ay magastos upang ayusin at samakatuwid ay "madikit," Sinusunod nito ang mga iyon, sa maising panahon (empirically, isip "para sa isang bilang ng mga buwan") mas mababa kaysa sa ganap na inaasahang pagbabago ng pangtutos o pangangailangan para sa pera ay maaring magbunga ng disequilibrium ng pera…. Samakatuwi ito ay isang kaakit-akit na hinaharap ng malayang pagbabangko sa mga praksyonal na reserba na ang nominal na dami ng perang inilabas ng-bangko na may kaugalian na ayusin upang mabawi ang mga pagbabago sa bilis ng pera.[^29]
> 
> Kung ang sistem ng pagbabangko ay nabigo upang dagdagan ang dami ng pera na inisyu-ng bangko at ang antas ng piresyo ay hindi kaagad bumababa, ang isang labis na pangangailangan para sa pera ay lumitaw (sa pag-aakala na base sa dami ng pera ay hindi kaagad magtataas). Ang isang katubas ng labis na pagbibigay ng mga kalakal ay naglilitawan: ang mga hindi nabentang kalakal ng mamimili ay nakalagay sa mga istante ng mga nagbebenta (ito ay tiyak na malapit sa paglalagay ng presyon pababa sa presyo, haggang ang mga huling presyo ng kalakal ay bumagsak ng sapat). Ang pagnenegosyo ay malungkot hanggang ang lakas ng mamimili ng pera ay maibalik sa punto ng balanse,[^30]

Mula sa pasimula, ang isa ay dapat magtaka tunkol sa tunay na kahulugan ng problema sa kawalang ng katarungan sa pera (hindi para magsalita pa tunkol sa mga solusyon). Sa mga wastong-pagbibigay ng presyo, ang isa ay maaring palitan ang kahit anong mabuti para sa pera: telebisyon, bakal, serbesa, o mga pretzel. Ang dami ng mga kalakal tulad ng mga ito ay matibay ang pagkakaayos (gaya ng dami ng ginto), gayunman (ang hindi inaasahang) mga pagbabago sa mga pangangailangan para sa tebesyon, bakal, serbesa, o mga pretzel ay hindi humantong sa pansamantalang pagkawala ng kinasasangkutang mga seryosong misallocations ng mga pagkukunan. O, sa anumang kaso, hindi ito nagiging sanhi ng mga problema na nangangailangan ng pag-imbento ng isang espesyal na bagong aparato (tulag ng praksyonal na telebisyon o produksyon ng serbesa).

Hindi rin malinaw kung bakit dapat namin paniwalaan na "mahalagang makilala sa pagitna ng mga implikasyon ng maiksi-panahon at mahabang-panahom ng pagbabago sa iskedyul ng mga pangangailangan para sa pera sa mga stock na pera,"[^31] o, sa kahit anong kaso, kung bakit ang pagkakaiba nito ay dapat may iba't ibang kahalagahan o kabuluhan sa kaso ng pera mula sa lahat ng iba pa. Upang makasigurado, ito ay nangangailangan ng oras bago ang isang hindi inaasahang pagtaas ng pangangailangan para sa mga telebisyon at serbesa, halimbawa, ay maubos na ang lahat ng mga epekto ng sistima na kaugnay ng mga presyo at isang bagong nakaayos na akmang produkto ang itinatag. Ngunit hindi ito na ngangahukugan na ang mga pagsasaayos ng presyo ay tumatagal ng kahit anong oras (samantalang nagiging sanhi ng mga problema sa maikling-panahon). Sa kabilang banda, ang pagbabago ng presyo ay nanyayari agad at walang pagkaantala,. Ang bawat pagbabago sa mga pangtustus o pangangailangan para sa anomang bagay ay nakakaapekto sa mga presyo agad. Ang katotohanang ito ay hindi nakaligtaan dahila sa pagmamalasik ng isang hindi-Austrian para macroeconomic na mga artifact tulad ng pangkalahatang antas ng presyo, at pangmahabang-panahong balanse ng bilis ng pera. Gayunpaman, tiningnan mula sa wastong perspektibo sa indibidwal, maaaring walang pagdududa tunkol sa pagmamadaling pagaayos sa presyo at sa praxeological na pagsasama-sama ng mga maiksi at pangmatagalan.

Sa mga indibidwal ng termino, isang mas mataas na pangangailangan para sa pera ay ang resulata ng mga mapanghamon na pagkilos ng mga indibidwal; iyon ay ang mga tao hangad ang pagtaas ng kanilang indibidwal na balanse sa pera. Upang gawin ito, dapat paghigpitan ng isang tao ang kanyang pamimili at/o pataasin ang kanyang mga benta. Sa alinmang kaso, ang kalalabasan ay isang agad na pagbagsak ng ilang mga presyo. Bilang resulta ng paghihigpit sa mga pagbili ng x, y, o z, ang presyo ng pera ng x, y, o z ay ibinaba agad (kumpara sa kung ano magiging kung hindi man), at gayundin sa pamamagitan ng mga benta ng isang, b, o c, ang kanilang mga presyo ay mahuhulog agad. Walang nag-aalala tungkol sa pangkalahatang antas ng presyo o ang pangkalahatang kakayahan ng pagbili ng pera. Instead, everyone is always concerned about specific prices and the purchasing power of money regarding specific items (and everyone is interested in his very own and different specific array of prices and purchasing power). In restricting his specific purchases and/or increasing his specific sales, each actor accomplishes exactly and immediately what he wants: certain prices that he deems too high are lowered, the purchasing power of a unit of money increases, the real value of his cash balance rises, and his demand for and supply of money is immediately brought back into equilibrium (and he wishes to hold neither more nor less money than he actually does).[^32]

The adjustment of the praxeologically meaningless general price level necessitated by an increased demand for money is nothing but the summation of a series of countless immediate and purposeful individual cash-balance adjustments. If the increased demand for money is accommodated by the issue of fiduciary media, as Selgin and White advocate this adjustment process will not be facilitated but delayed.[^33] The speed of the adjustment of prices depends on the market-participants’ expectations concerning the given quantity of money. If it is reasonable to assume that fractional reserve banks will increase their fiduciary issues in response to an unanticipated increase in the demand for money, then the adjustment will take *more* time. Production would adjust and begin *earlier* without the additional influence of inflation.[^34]

Moreover, the proposed solution to the alleged problem of short-run monetary disequilibrium displays a fundamental confusion regarding the concept of demand (and supply), and the relationship between the demand for money, saving, and investment in particular. First, an increased demand for money (as for televisions, beer, or pretzels) is not just a wish to have more money (or televisions, beer, etc.), but *effective* demand. That is, an increased demand for money (as for anything else) can be satisfied only if the demander is willing to increase his market-supply of and/or reduce his demand for something else. Likewise, the supplier (seller) of money can only increase his supply of money if he reduces simultaneously the supply of (or his reservation demand for) something else. The authors have overlooked Say’s law: all goods (property) are bought with other goods, no one can demand anything without supplying something else, and no one can demand or supply more of anything unless he demands or supplies less of something else. But this is here *not* the case whenever a fiduciary note is supplied and demanded. The increased demand for money is satisfied without the demander demanding, and without the supplier supplying, less of anything else. Through the issue and sale of fiduciary media, wishes are accommodated, not effective demand. Property is appropriated (effectively demanded) without supplying other property in exchange. Hence, this is not a market exchange—which is governed by Say’s law—but an act of undue appropriation. Or would it be an efficient solution to the problem of unanticipated short-run television, beer, or pretzel-shortages if television, beer, and pretzel producers were to accommodate such increased demand “temporarily” by issuing and selling additional titles to televisions, beer, and pretzels but not these goods themselves?

Second, Selgin and White further misconstrue the nature of money and demand for money held in making the extraordinary claim that the issue of fiduciary media “*matched by an increased demand to hold fiduciary media*” is not only not disequilibrating, but will actually afford the economy a “larger stock of capital equipment,” because

> [t]he act of holding fractional-reserve *bank-issued* money not only (like holding base money) defers consumption for a longer or shorter period, but also *temporarily lends funds* to the bank of issue in doing so. The period of the loan is unspecified … but if the bank can estimate with a fair degree of accuracy the lengths of time for which its demand claims will remain in circulation … it can safely make investments of corresponding length.[^35]

Following the lead of Rothbard, Hoppe criticized this essentially Keynesian view concerning the relationship between the demand for money and savings (loanable funds)[^36] by pointing out that

> [n]ot-spending money is to purchase *neither* consumer goods *nor* investment goods…. Individuals may employ their monetary assets in one of three ways. They can spend them on consumer goods; they can spend them on investment; or they can keep them in the form of cash. There are no other alternatives…. The consumption/investment proportion, i.e., the decision of how much … to spend on consumption and how much on investment, is determined by a person’s time preference; i.e., the degree to which he prefers present consumption over future consumption. On the other hand, the source of his demand for cash is the utility attached to money; i.e., the personal satisfaction derived from money in allowing him immediate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates.
> 
> Accordingly, if the demand for money increases while the social stock of money is given, this additional demand can only be satisfied by bidding down the money prices of non money goods. The purchasing power of money will increase, the *real* value of individual cash balances will be raised, and at a higher purchasing power per unit money, the demand for and the supply of money will once again be equilibrated. The relative price of money versus non-money will have changed. But *unless* time preference is assumed to have changed at the same time, *real* consumption and *real* investment will remain the same as before: the additional money demand is satisfied by reducing nominal consumption *and* investment spending in accordance with the same pre-existing consumption/investment proportion, driving the money prices of both consumer as well as producer goods down and leaving real consumption and investment at precisely their old levels.[^37]

Accordingly, Hoppe concluded, it is *never* warranted to accommodate an increased demand for money by issuing fiduciary credit.[^38] In fact, to do so will either—insofar as the accommodating increase of fiduciary media is unanticipated and the market rate of interest falls temporarily below the natural rate of interest—lead to a boom-bust cycle; or else—insofar as the monetary change arising from the banking system is anticipated and the market rate of interest is bid up (in the expectation of higher selling prices) in accordance with the height of the natural rate—it will accomplish no more than a plain wealth and income redistribution among various members of society. It is praxeologically impossible, however, that the issue of fiduciary media can lead to an “enlarged stock of capital equipment.”

[^28]: Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993), p. 851.

[^29]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 100–01.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 105\. As Roger Garrison, another fractional reserve free banker, has put it, “in terms of the equation of exchange [MV=PQ], we can say that free banking adjusts M so as to offset changes in V; but allows changes in Q to be accommodated by changes in P.” Garrison describes the short-run “monetary disequilibrium” in almost identical form:

> An increase in the demand for money puts downward pressure on product and factor prices in general. If there were no money-supply response, a general decline in economic activity would follow, since prices and wages could not fully and instantaneously adjust themselves to the new market conditions. Goods in general would go unsold; production would be cut; workers would be laid off…. With a less-than-perfectly flexible price system, general deflationary pressures can push the economy below its potential during the period in which prices are adjusting to the higher monetary demand. And the fact that some prices and some wages are more flexible than others means that the adjustment period will involve changes in relative prices that reflect no changes in relative scarcities. These are precisely the kinds of problems … avoided by free banking’s responsiveness to increases in money demand. (“Central Banking, Free Banking, and Financial Crises,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 9, no. 2 [1996]: 117)

[^31]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 100.

[^32]: Thus writes Mises:

> Buyers and sellers on the market never concern themselves with the elements in the equation of exchange, of which two—velocity of circulation and the price level—do not even exist before market parties act and the other two—the quantity of money (in the whole economy) and the sum of transactions—could not possibly be known to the parties in the market. Only the importance which the various actors in the market attach, on the one hand, to the maintenance of a cash balance of a certain magnitude and, on the other hand, to the ownership of the various goods in question determines the formation of the exchange relationship between money and goods. (“The Position of Money Among Economic Goods,” in *Money, Method, and the Market Process*, Richard Ebeling, ed. [Boston: Kluwer, 1990], p. 61)

[^33]: Moreover, from an individualist perspective, the increased demand for money occurs with specific actors at specific times and places. It is not sufficient for banks to accommodate some abstract higher money demand by more money; rather, but the accommodation would have to occur precisely with the correct people and locations. If this is not the case, one can hardly speak of an accommodation but of an additional distortion. This difficulty was recognized by the early Hayek:

> in order to eliminate all monetary influences on the formation of prices, and the structure of production, it would not be sufficient merely quantitatively to adapt the supply of money to these changes in demand, it would be necessary also to see that it came into the hands of those who actually require it; that is, to that part of the system where that change in business organization or the habits of payment had taken place. (*Prices and Production* [London: Routledge, 1935], p. 124)

With the later Hayek, one wonders how banks could possibly have the requisite knowledge of performing this task.

[^34]: As regards the stickiness of prices, and the redistributive consequences of an increased demand for money vis-à-vis an array of prices of varying degrees of stickiness, which Selgin and White as well as Garrison raise as matters of concern, it is of utmost importance to recognize that prices are the outcome of purposive action—and so is their stickiness. That is, the flexibility or inflexibility of various product and service prices is not accidental to, but a deliberate part of, these products and services. Contrary to Garrison’s claim, the stickiness of prices does affect and is related to, real relative scarcities. If more sticky prices suffer more, so to speak, so be it; that will teach them to be less sticky in the future—if the owners of the property in question act in a manner compatible with this end.

[^35]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 103\. The error of confusing property and titles lies also at the bottom of Selgin and White’s attempts to separate analytically the demand for outside money from the demand for inside money, as if these were somehow two different kinds of money with two different and independent demands.

[^36]: Selgin stated the same thesis thus:

> Whenever a bank expands its liabilities in the process of making new loans and investments, it is the holders of the liabilities who are the ultimate lenders of credit, and what they lend are the real resources they could acquire if, instead of holding money, they spent it. When the expansion or contraction of bank liabilities proceeds in such a way as to be at all times in agreement with changing demands for inside money, the quantity of real capital funds supplied to borrowers by the banks is equal to the quantity voluntarily offered to the banks by the public. Under these conditions, banks are simply intermediaries of loanable funds. (*The Theory of Free Banking: Money Supply under Competitive Note Issue*, p. 55)

As for John Maynard Keynes (*The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money* [New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1936], p. 82), he had written that the notion that the creation of credit by banking systems allows investment to take place to which “no genuine saving” corresponds; that is, “the idea that saving and investment … can differ from one another, is to be explained, I think, by an optical illusion” (p. 81).

> [T]he savings which result from this decision are just as genuine as any other savings. No one can be compelled to own the additional money corresponding to the new bank-credit, unless he deliberately prefers to hold more money rather than some other form of wealth. (p. 83)

Indeed, Selgin acknowledges that

> many Keynesians might accept the prescription for monetary equilibrium offered [by him]. Those who do not regard the liquidity trap as an important factual possibility would probably accept it as entirely adequate. (*The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 59)

Henry Hazlitt remarked on this Keynesian idea that

> [o]n the same reasoning we can create any amount of new “savings” we wish overnight, simply by printing that amount of new paper money, because *somebody* will necessarily hold that new paper money! (*The Failure of the “New Economics”: An Analysis of the Keynesian Fallacies* [Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 1983], p. 227)

[^37]: Hoppe, “How is Fiat Money Possible?,” pp. 72–73.

[^38]: See also Hoppe, “The Theory of Employment, Money, Interest, and the Capitalist Process: The Misesian Case against Keynes,” in *The Economics and Ethics of Private Property* (Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer, 1993), and Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1993), pp. 167ff., 667ff.; idem, *America’s Great Depression* (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983), pp. 39ff.

As for Selgin and White’s claim of being Misesians, it is worthwhile to quote Mises on

> the role cash holding plays in the process of saving and capital accumulation…. [i]f an individual employs a sum of money not for consumption but for the purchase of factors of production, saving is directly turned into capital accumulation. If the individual saver employs his additional savings for increasing his cash holding because this is in his eyes the most advantageous mode of using them, he brings about a tendency toward a fall in commodity prices and a rise in the monetary unit’s purchasing power. If we assume that the supply of money in the market system does not change, this conduct on the part of the saver will not directly influence the accumulation of capital and its employment for an expansion of production. The effect of our saver’s saving, i.e., the surplus of goods produced over goods consumed, does not disappear on account of his hoarding. The prices of capital goods do not rise to the height they would have attained in the absence of such hoarding. But the fact that more capital goods are available is not affected by the striving of a number of people to increase their cash holdings. If nobody employs the goods—the nonconsumption of which brought about the additional saving—for an expansion of his consumptive spending, they remain as an increment in the amount of capital goods available, whatever their prices may be. The two processes—increased cash holding of some people and increased capital accumulation—take place side by side. A drop in commodity prices, other things being equal, causes a drop in the money equivalent of the various individuals’ capital. But this is not tantamount to a reduction in the supply of capital goods and does not require an adjustment of production activities to an alleged impoverishment. It merely alters the money items to be applied in monetary calculation. (Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 521–22)