### The Alter Ego

oburu n'anyi  di njikere na anyi were ihe okwu akpata na'ya sara'ambara maka ihe nwu'uche, teleology nwere ike ịbụ ihe dịgasị iche iche na-eche na ụfọdụ njedebe.

Haa abụọ  nwoke oge ochie na nwa ọhụrụ, na nke  ndị na enweghị uche anthropomorphic àgwà, tule ya ezi dị mma na mgbanwe ọ bụla ma ihe omume bụ ihe Nsonaazụ  nke edinam nke  a'ibu eme na nke otu ụzọ dị ka ha onwe ha eme.ha kwere na anumanu ,osisi,ugwu, osimiri,ma isi mmiri, ọbụna nkume ma
ahụ dị n'eluigwe,bu , dị ka onwe ha, mmetụta, njikere,ma eme ndị mmadụ. naanị na emesia nke omenala mmepe eme nwoke jụ ndị a  echiche anụmanụ ma dochie nke mechanistic ụwa lee maka
ha. Mechanicalism gosi na-adị ya mere afọ ojuju a ụkpụrụ nke omume na ndị mmadụ n'ikpeazụ kwere ya
ike nke edozi ha niile nke nsogbu nke chere ma sayensị nnyocha. Ihe onwunwe ma panphysicalism
kwusaa mechanicalism dị ka nke kachasị mkpa nke niile ihe omuma ma nke nnwale ma mgbakọ na mwepụ usoro ma nke eke sayensị dị ka nke naanị sayensị otu esi eche echiche.

mgbanwe niile ga-abụ ghọta dị ka mgbochi n'okpuru nke iwu nhazi.

nke ndị mmeri of mechanicalism eme ọ bụghị nsogbu banyere nke ka enweghị ike nsogbu nke ezi uche ma
usoro ihe omuma ndabere nke ụkpụrụ nke akpata ma ezughị okè ntinye. n'anya ha ụkpụrụ ndị a
bu ụda n'ihi na ha na-arụ ọrụ. Nke bu eziokwu ule na nke erbe egi eme nnwale weta banyere nsonazụ ahụ
buru amụma site na nkwupụta ma nke igwe  na nke ụlọ ọrụ na-agba ọsọ na nke ụzọ buru amụma site nkà na ụzụ
gosipụtara, ha na-ekwu, nke uda nke usoro ma nchoputa nke oge a eke sayensị. N'ezie na 
sayensị enweghị ike nye anyị eziokwu --ma onye maara Kedu eziokwu pụtara n'ezie?--na ọ bụla ọnụego ọ bụ ụfọdụ na ya arụ ọrụ na edu anyị ga-enwe ihe ịga nke ọma.
Ma ọ bụ kpọmkwem mgbe anyị nabatara ihe omimi a echiche nke ahụ ihe efu nke panphysicalist
nkwenye aghọ gosipụta. Sayensị, dị ka nwere e kwuru n'elu, enweghị  nke gara nke ọma na-edozi nke 
nsogu nke uche na-ahu mmekọrịta.nke panphysicalists N'ezie enweghị ike na-ese okwu na nke usoro
ha na-akwado nwere mgbe arụ ọrụ  na nke ubi nke mmadụ mmekọrịta na nke nkà mmụta sayensị. Ma ya
enweghi obi abua na nke ụkpụrụ dabere na nke otu_ mpako_ emeso ya mmadụ ọ bụla dị ka ma ọ bụrụ na 
ndị ọzọ bụ a eche echiche na eme ihe dị ka onwe ya egosiputa uru ma na mundane ndụ na na nnyocha sayensị. Ọ pụghị agọnahụ na ọ na-arụ ọrụ.

O doro anya na ọ dịghị na nke omume nke tụlee ibe  ndị ikom ndị mmadụ onye na-eche ma mee ihe dị ka m,nke mpako,eme nwere tụgharị nke ọma; n'akụkụ aka nke ọzọ nke atụmanya  yiri ka olileanya ọ bụla nke na-eme otu ihe ahụ ezi uche nkwenye maka nke zipu achọrọ ha na-adị emeso na nke otu ụzọ dị ka nke ihe dika nke nkà mmụta sayensị.
nke  epistemologica nsogbu zụlitere site nke nghọta nke ndị ọzọ omume mmadụ enweghị Mpekarị
egwu karịa ndị nke akpata ma ezughị ezu ntinye. o nwere ike ịbụ kwetara na ya agaghị ekwe omume na
nye obi ike ihe akaebe maka nke atụmatụ okpu nke echiche bụ nke echiche nke niile ndị ọzọ na site niile
pụtara kpamkpam nke naanị nmadu echiche na nke ahụ edemede nke  niile ndị ọzọ edinam na n'ụzọ niile kpamkpam  nke edemede nke niile mmadụ edinam.

Otú ọ dị, the pragmatist aghaghị cheta na ndị a atụmatụ na-arụ ọrụ abụọ na omume na nke na sayensị,
ma nke mma eleghara anya  eziokwu na na okwu ibe ya ndị ikom ọ eche echiche-- ghọtara na n'ụzọ zuru ez -- nke ihe gbasara onwe ezi nke mgbagha na site na ya nke eziokwu na nke ala nke gbanwee mpako chere ma edinam, nke ya ama ama mmadụ agwa [^8].

Iche echiche na ime ihe bụ atụmatụ mmadụ kpọmkwem nke mmadụ. Ha bụ dị iche iche nye mmadu nile. Ha bụ, agafeghi otu na nke ebi ah anumamu ne bi ụdị oge ochie nde madu bi,nke njirimara akara mmadụ dị ka mmadụ. Ọ bụghị ya nke pratology iji nyochaa  nke mmekọrịta nke iche echiche na ime ihe.
Maka ihe ah na kpor praxeology ọ bụ ezuru na guzobe nke eziokwu na n'ebe ahụ bụ naanị otu mgbagha nke ahụ bụ nghọta na uche mmadu, na nke ahụ enwere otu ụdị omume nke mmadụ na nghọta nke uche mmadu. Ma enwere obu ma ọ bụ nwere ike ịbụ ebe ndị ọzọ-- karịrị mmadụ ma ọ bụ subhuman-- onye na-eche onye na-eche ma na-eme na a ụzọ dị iche, karịrị ihe ikike nke uche mmadụ. Anyị garịrị eme ya machibido ihe anyị na-eme na ọmụmụ na-amụ banyere ihe mmadụ mere.

Omume a nke mmadụ enweghị ọnụ jikọtara mmadụ Echere na enwere ọnọdụ site na ezi mkpa. Ọ gaghị ekwe omume maka uche mmadu iji tụọ uche n'echiche mmekọrịta dị iche iche na usoro ezi uche nke uche anyị. Ọ gaghị ekwe omume maka uche mmadu na-atụrụ ime ihe omume onye edemede ya ga- dị iche na edemede nke ikpebi omume anyị.

Enwere mmadụ naanị abụọ ụkpụrụ dị dị maka ọgụgụ isi nke eziokwu, ya bụ, ndị nke teleology. Ihe apughi ime n'okpuru ma nke ọ bụla n'ime edemede ndị a ezoro ezo na ka uche mmadu. Ihe omume emegheghi nkọwa site na otu n'ime ụkpụrụ abụọ a bụ maka mmadụ ihe a na-apụghị ịghọta na ihe omimi. Mgbanwe nwere ike ime ime dị ka ihe si na ya pụta ọrụ nke arụmọrụ mechanics ma ọ bụ nke nwere nzube; maka uche mmadu ọ dịghị ụzọ nke atọ dịnụ[^9]. Ọ bụ eziokwu, na teleology  dị ka e kwuworo,  na a na-ele teleology anya dị ka ọtụtụ ihe kpatara ya  akpata.ma nke guzobe eziokwu a anaghị eme ka ihe dị iche iche dị mkpa n'etiti edemede abụọ.

nke panmechanistic elere anya ụwa usoro ihe omuma; ọ na-ekweta naanị ehe ah na kpor mechanistic akpata ya n'ihi ya ọ bụ naanị ya ka ọ na-eche bara uru ma ọ bụ na ọ dịkarịa ala a na-echekwu echiche teleology--bu, n'ihi ike nke echiche mmadụ, ezughị okè ma ghara ikwupụta kachasị ihe omuma. Ọkpụkpụ na-eduga na a _ regressus na infinitum_ nke a enweghị ike ịchapu. Teleology bụ chọtara achọ ozugbo ịjụ ajụjụ ahụ a na - akpọlite ihe na - eme ka ọ ghọọ onye isi. Ụzọ ọ bụla na-akwụsị obere na ihe kachasị enye nke enweghị ike ịbụ nyochaa ma kọwaa ya.




Reasoning and scientific inquiry can never bring full ease of mind, apodictic certainty, and perfect cognition of all things. He who seeks this must apply to faith and try to quiet his conscience by embracing a creed or a metaphysical doctrine.

If we do not transcend the realm of reason and experience, we cannot help acknowledging that our fellow men act. We are not free to disregard this fact for the sake of a fashionable prepossession and an arbitrary opinion. Daily experience proves not only that the sole suitable method for studying the conditions of our nonhuman environment is provided by the category of causality; it proves no less convincingly that our fellow men are acting beings as we ourselves are. For the comprehension of action there is but one scheme of interpretation and analysis available, namely, that provided by the cognition and analysis of our own purposeful behavior.

The problem of the study and analysis of other people's action is in no way connected with the problem of the existence of a _soul_ or of an _immortal soul_. As far as the objections of empiricism, behaviorism, and positivism are directed against any variety of the soul-theory, they are of no avail for our problem. The question we have to deal with is whether it is possible to grasp human action intellectually if one refuses to comprehend it as meaningful and purposeful behavior aiming at the attainment of definite ends. Behaviorism and positivism want to apply the methods of the empirical natural sciences to the reality of human action. They interpret it as a response to stimuli. But these stimuli themselves are not open to description by the methods of the natural sciences. Every attempt to describe them must refer to the meaning which acting men attach to them. We may call the offering of a commodity for sale a "stimulus." But what is essential in such an offer and distinguishes it from other offers cannot be described without entering into the meaning which the acting parties attribute to the situation. No dialectical artifice can spirit away the fact that man is driven by the aim to attain certain ends. It is this purposeful behavior--viz., action--that is the subject matter of our science. We cannot approach our subject if we disregard the meaning which acting man attaches to the situation, i.e., the given state of affairs, and to his own behavior with regard to this situation.

It is not appropriate for the physicist to search for final causes because there is no indication that the events which are the subject matter of physics are to be interpreted as the outcome of actions of a being, aiming at ends in a human way. Nor is it appropriate for the praxeologist to disregard the operation of the acting being's volition and intention; they are undoubtedly given facts. If he were to disregard it, he would cease to study human action. Very often--but not always--the events concerned can be investigated both from the point of view of praxeology and from that of the natural sciences. But he who deals with the discharging of a firearm from the physical and chemical point of view is not a praxeologist. He neglects the very problems which the science of purposeful human behavior aims to clarify.

#### On the Serviceableness of Instincts

The proof of the fact that only two avenues of approach are available for human research, causality or teleology, is provided by the problems raised in reference to the serviceableness of instincts. There are types of behavior which on the one hand cannot be thoroughly interpreted with the causal methods of the natural sciences, but on the other hand cannot be considered as purposeful human action. In order to grasp such behavior we are forced to resort to a makeshift. We assign to it the character of a quasi-action; we speak of serviceable instincts.

We observe two things: first the inherent tendency of a living organism to respond to a stimulus according to a regular pattern, and second the favorable effects of this kind of behavior for the strengthening or preservation of the organism's vital forces. If we were in a position to interpret such behavior as the outcome of purposeful aiming at certain ends, we would call it action and deal with it according to the teleological methods of praxeology. But as we found no trace of a conscious mind behind this behavior, we suppose that an unknown factor--we call it _instinct_--was instrumental. We say that the instinct directs quasi-purposeful animal behavior and unconscious but nonetheless serviceable responses of human muscles and nerves. Yet, the mere fact that we hypostatize the unexplained element of this behavior as a force and call it instinct does not enlarge our knowledge. We must never forget that this word instinct is nothing but a landmark to indicate a point beyond which we are unable, up to the present at least, to carry our scientific scrutiny.

Biology has succeeded in discovering a "natural," i.e., mechanistic, explanation for many processes which in earlier days were attributed to the operation of instincts. Nonetheless many others have remained which cannot be interpreted as mechanical or chemical responses to mechanical or chemical stimuli. Animals display attitudes which cannot be comprehended otherwise than through the assumption that a directing factor was operative.

The aim of behaviorism to study human action from without with the methods of animal psychology is illusory. As far as animal behavior goes beyond mere physiological processes like breathing and metabolism, it can only be investigated with the aid of the meaning-concepts developed by praxeology. The behaviorist approaches the object of his investigations with the human notions of purpose and success. He unwittingly applies to the subject matter of his studies the human concepts of serviceableness and perniciousness. He deceives himself in excluding all verbal reference to consciousness and aiming at ends. In fact his mind searches everywhere for ends and measures every attitude with the yardstick of a garbled notion of serviceableness. The science of human behavior--as far as it is not physiology--cannot abandon reference to meaning and purpose. It cannot learn anything from animal psychology and the observation of the unconscious reactions of newborn infants. It is, on the contrary, animal psychology and infant psychology which cannot renounce the aid afforded by the science of human action. Without praxeological categories we would be at a loss to conceive and to understand the behavior both of animals and of infants.

The observation of the instinctive behavior of animals fills man with astonishment and raises questions which nobody can answer satisfactorily. Yet the fact that animals and even plants react in a quasi-purposeful way is neither more nor less miraculous than that man thinks and acts, that in the inorganic universe those functional correspondences prevail which physics describes, and that in the organic universe biological processes occur. All this is miraculous in the sense that it is an ultimate given for our searching mind.

Such an ultimate given is also what we call animal instinct. Like the concepts of motion, force, life, and consciousness, the concept of instinct too is merely a term to signify an ultimate given. To be sure, it neither "explains" anything nor indicates a cause or an ultimate cause.[^10]

#### The Absolute End

In order to avoid any possible misinterpretation of the praxeological categories it seems expedient to emphasize a truism.

Praxeology, like the historical sciences of human action, deals with purposeful _human_ action. If it mentions _ends_, what it has in view is the ends at which acting men aim. If it speaks of _meaning_, it refers to the meaning which acting men attach to their actions.

Praxeology and history are manifestations of the human mind and as such are conditioned by the intellectual abilities of mortal men. Praxeology and history do not pretend to know anything about the intentions of an absolute and objective mind, about an objective meaning inherent in the course of events and of historical evolution, and about the plans which God or Nature or Weltgeist or Manifest Destiny is trying to realize in directing the universe and human affairs. They have nothing in common with what is called philosophy of history. They do not, like the works of Hegel, Comte, Marx, and a host of other writers, claim to reveal information about the true, objective, and absolute meaning of life and history.[^11]

#### Vegetative Man

Some philosophies advise men to seek as the ultimate end of conduct the complete renunciation of any action. They look upon life as an absolute evil full of pain, suffering, and anguish, and apodictically deny that any purposeful human effort can render it tolerable. Happiness can be attained only by complete extinction of consciousness, volition, and life. The only way toward bliss and salvation is to become perfectly passive, indifferent, and inert like the plants. The sovereign good is the abandonment of thinking and acting.

Such is the essence of the teachings of various Indian philosophies, especially of Buddhism, and of Schopenhauer. Praxeology does not comment upon them. It is neutral with regard to all judgments of value and the choice of ultimate ends. Its task is not to approve or to disapprove, but to describe what is.

The subject matter of praxeology is human action. It deals with acting man, not with man transformed into a plant and reduced to a merely vegetative existence.

[^8]: Cf. Alfred Schütz, _Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt_ (Vinna, 1932), p. 18.

[^9]: Cr. Karel Engliš, _Begründung der Teleologie als Form des empirischen Erkennens_ (Brünn, 1930), pp. 15 ff.

[^10]: "La vie est une cause première qui nous échappe comme toutes les causes premières et dont la science expérimentale n'a pas à se préoccuper." Claude Bernard, _Law Science expérimentale_ (Paris, 1878), p. 137.

[^11]: On the philosophy of history, cf. Mises, _Theory and History_ (New Haven, 1957), pp. 159. ff.
