Alam natin ang kapalaran ng mga termino sa liberal at liberalismo. It has been affixed to so many different people and different positions that it has lost all its meaning and become an empty, non-descript label. The same fate now increasingly also threatens the term libertarian and libertarianism that was invented to regain some of the conceptual precision lost with the demise of the former labels.

However, the history of modern libertarianism is still quite young. It began in Murray Rothbard’s living room and found its first quasi-canonical expression in his *For A New Liberty. A Libertarian Manifesto*, published in 1973. And so I am still hopeful and not yet willing to give up on libertarianism as defined and explained by Rothbard with unrivaled conceptual clarity and precision, notwithstanding the meanwhile countless attempts of so-called libertarians to muddy the water and misappropriate the good name of libertarianism for something entirely different.

The theoretical, irrefutable core of the libertarian doctrine is simple and straightforward and I have explained it already repeatedly at this place. If there were no scarcity in the world, human conflicts or more precisely physical clashes would be impossible. Interpersonal conflicts are always conflicts concerning scarce things. I want to do A with a given thing and you want to do B with the same thing. Because of such conflicts – and because we are able to communicate and argue with each other – we seek out norms of behavior with the purpose of avoiding these conflicts. The purpose of norms is conflict-avoidance. If we did not want to avoid conflicts, the search for norms of conduct would be senseless. We would simply fight and struggle.

Absent a perfect harmony of all interests, conflicts regarding scarce resources can only be avoided if all scarce resources are assigned as private, exclusive property to some specified individual or group of individuals. Only then can I act independently, with *my* own things, from you, with *your* own things, without you and me clashing.

But who owns what scarce resource as his private property and who does not? First: Each person owns his physical body that only he and no one else controls *directly*. And second, as for scarce resources that can be controlled *only* indirectly[^1]: Exclusive control[^2] is acquired by and assigned to that person, who appropriated the resource in question *first* or who acquired it through voluntary[^3] exchange from its *previous* owner. For only the *first* appropriator of a resource[^4] can possibly acquire and gain control over it without conflict, i.e., peacefully. Otherwise, if exclusive control is assigned instead to *latecomers*, conflict is not avoided but contrary to the very purpose of norms made unavoidable and permanent.

Before this audience I do not need to go into greater detail except to add this: If you want to live in peace with other people and avoid all physical clashes and, if such clashes do occur, seek to resolve them peacefully, then you must be an anarchist or more precisely a private property anarchist, an anarcho-capitalist or a proponent of a private law society.

And by implication, then, and again without much further ado: Someone, anyone, is *not* a libertarian or merely a *fake* libertarian who affirms and advocates one or more of the following: the necessity of a State, any State, of ‘public’ (State) property and of taxes in order to live in peace; or the existence and justifiability of any so-called “human rights” or “civil rights” other than private property rights, such as “women rights,” “gay rights,” “minority rights”, the “right” not to be discriminated against, the “right” to free and unrestricted immigration, the “right” to a guaranteed minimum income or to free health care, or the “right” to be free of unpleasant speech and thought. The proponents of any of this may call themselves whatever they want, and as libertarians we may well cooperate with them, insofar as such a cooperation offers the promise of bringing us closer to our ultimate goal, but they are not *libertarians* or only *fake* libertarians.

Now, “a funny thing happened on the way to the forum”. While Rothbard and I, following in his footsteps, never went astray from these theoretically derived core beliefs, not just non-libertarians but in particular also fake libertarians, i.e., people claiming (falsely) to *be* libertarians, and even many possibly honest yet dim-witted libertarians have selected and vilified us as their favorite *betes noires* and incarnates of evil. Rothbard, the *spiritus rector* of modern libertarianism, has been branded by this so-called “anti-fascist” crowd as a reactionary, a racist, a sexist, an authoritarian, an elitist, a xenophobe, a fascist and, to top it all off, a self-hating Jewish Nazi. And I have inherited all of these honorary titles, plus a few more (except for the Jewish stuff). So what funny thing has happened here?

Trying to develop an answer to this question brings me to the topic of this speech: the relationship between libertarianism and the alternative right or “Alt-Right,” which has gained national and international notoriety after Hillary Clinton, during the last presidential election campaign, identified it as one of the inspirational sources behind the “basket of deplorables” rooting for Trump[^5].

The Alt-Right movement is essentially the successor of the paleo-conservative movement that came to prominence in the early 1990’s, with columnist and best-selling author Patrick Buchanan as its best-known representative. It went somewhat dormant by the late 1990’s, and it has recently, in light of the steadily growing damage done to America and its reputation by the successive Bush I, Clinton, Bush II and Obama administrations, reemerged more vigorous than before under the new label of the Alt-Right. Many of the leading lights associated with the Alt-Right have appeared here at our meetings in the course of the years. Paul Gottfried, who first coined the term, Peter Brimelow, Richard Lynn, Jared Taylor, John Derbyshire, Steve Sailer and Richard Spencer. As well, Sean Gabb’s name and mine are regularly mentioned in connection with the Alt-Right, and my work has been linked also with the closely related neo-reactionary movement inspired by Curtis Yarvin[^6] and his now defunct blog *Unqualified Reservations*. In sum, these personal relations and associations have earned me several honorable mentions by America’s most famous smear-and-defamation league, the SPLC[^7].

Now: How about the relationship between libertarianism and the Alt-Right and my reasons for inviting leading representatives of the Alt-Right to meetings with libertarians? Libertarians are united by the irrefutable theoretical core beliefs mentioned at the outset. They are clear about the goal that they want to achieve. But the libertarian doctrine does not imply much if anything concerning *these* questions:

1. How to maintain a libertarian order once achieved;
2. How to attain a libertarian order from a non-libertarian starting point, which requires: 
    1. That one must correctly describe this starting point;
    2. Correctly identify the obstacles posed in the way of one’s libertarian ends by this very starting point.

To answer these questions, in addition to theory, you also need some knowledge of human psychology and sociology or at least a modicum of common sense. Yet many libertarians and fake libertarians are plain ignorant of human psychology and sociology or even devoid of any common sense. They blindly accept, against all empirical evidence, an egalitarian, blank-slate view of human nature, of all people and all societies and cultures being essentially equal and interchangeable.

While much of contemporary libertarianism can be characterized, then, as theory and theorists without psychology and sociology, much or even most of the Alt-Right can be described, in contrast, as psychology and sociology without theory. Alt-Righters are not united by a commonly held theory, and there exists nothing even faintly resembling a canonical text defining its meaning. Rather, the Alt-Right is essentially united in its description of the contemporary world, and in particular the US and the so-called Western World, and the identification and diagnosis of its social pathologies. In fact, it has been correctly noted that the Alt-Right is far more united by what it is against than what it is for. It is against, and indeed it hates with a passion, the elites in control of the State, the MSM and academia. Why? Because they all promote social degeneracy and pathology. Thus, they promote, and the Alt-Right vigorously opposes, egalitarianism, affirmative action[^8], multiculturalism, and “free” mass immigration as a means of bringing multiculturalism about. As well, the Alt-Right loathes everything smacking of cultural Marxism or Gramsciism and all “political correctness” and, strategically wise, it shrugs off, without any apology whatsoever, all accusations of being racist, sexist, elitist, supremacist, homophobe, xenophobe, etc., etc. And the Alt-Right also laughs off as hopelessly naïve the programmatic motto of so-called libertarians such as the _Students for Liberty_[^9] of “Peace, Love, and Liberty,” appropriately translated into German by Lichtschlag as “Friede, Freude, Eierkuchen.” In stark contrast to this, Alt-Righters insist that life is also about strife, hate, struggle and fight, not just between individuals but also among various groups of people acting in concert. “_Millennial Woes”_[^10] has thus aptly summarized the Alt-Right:

> Equality is bullshit. Hierarchy is essential. The races are different. The sexes are different. Morality matters and degeneracy is real. All cultures are not equal and we are not obligated to think they are. Man is a fallen creature and there is more to life than hollow materialism. Finally, the white race matters, and civilization is precious. This is the Alt-Right.

Absent any unifying theory, however, there is far less agreement among the Alt-Right about the goal that it ultimately wants to achieve. Many of its leading lights have distinctly libertarian leanings, most notably those that have come here[^11], even if they are not 100%-ers and would not identify themselves as such. All Alt-Righters that have appeared here, for instance, have been familiar with Rothbard and his work, all the while the most recent presidential candidate of the Libertarian Party had never even heard of Rothbard’s name, and all of them, to the best of my knowledge, were outspoken supporters of Ron Paul during his primary campaign for the Republican Party’s nomination as presidential candidate, all the while many self-proclaimed libertarians attacked and tried to vilify Ron Paul for his supposedly - you already know what’s coming by now - “racist” views.

However, several of the Alt-Right’s leaders and many of its rank and file followers have also endorsed views incompatible with libertarianism. As Buchanan before and Trump now, they are adamant about complementing a policy of restrictive, highly selective and discriminating immigration[^12] with a strident policy of restricted trade, economic protectionism and protective tariffs[^13].[^14]

Others strayed even further afield, such as Richard Spencer, who first popularized the term Alt-Right. In the meantime, owing to several recent publicity stunts, which have gained him some degree of notoriety in the US, Spencer has laid claim to the rank of the maximum leader of a supposedly mighty unified movement[^15]. When Spencer appeared here, several years ago, he still exhibited strong libertarian leanings. Unfortunately, however, this has changed and Spencer now denounces, without any qualification whatsoever, all libertarians and everything libertarian and has gone so far as to even put up with socialism, as long as it is socialism of and for only white people. What horrifying disappointment!

Given the lack of any theoretical foundation, this split of the Alt-Right movement into rival factions can hardly be considered a surprise. Yet this fact should not mislead one to dismiss it, because the Alt-Right has brought out many insights that are of central importance in approaching an answer to the two previously mentioned questions unanswered by libertarian theory: of how to maintain a libertarian social order and how to get to such an order from the current, decidedly un-libertarian status quo. The Alt-Right did not discover these insights. They had been established long before and indeed, in large parts they are no more than common sense. But in recent times such insights have been buried under mountains of egalitarian, leftist propaganda and the Alt-Right must be credited for having brought them back to light.

To illustrate the importance of such insights, let me take the first unanswered question first.

Many libertarians hold the view that all that is needed to maintain a libertarian social order is the strict enforcement of the non-aggression principle (NAP). Otherwise, as long as one abstains from aggression, according to their view, the principle of “live and let live” should hold. Yet surely, while this “live and let live” sounds appealing to adolescents in rebellion against parental authority and all social convention and control[^16], and while the principle does indeed hold and apply for people living far apart and dealing with each other only indirectly and from afar, it does *not* hold and apply, or rather it is *insufficient*, when it comes to people living in close proximity to each other, as neighbors and cohabitants of the same community.

A simple example suffices to make the point. Assume a new next-door neighbor. This neighbor does not aggress against you or your property in any way, but he is a “bad” neighbor. He is littering on his own neighboring property, turning it into a garbage heap; in the open, for you to see, he engages in ritual animal slaughter, he turns his house into a “Freudenhaus,” a bordello, with clients coming and going all day and all night long; he never offers a helping hand and never keeps any promise that he has made; or he cannot or else he refuses to speak to you in your own language. Etc., etc.. Your life is turned into a nightmare. Yet you may not use violence against him, because he has not aggressed against you. What can you do? You can shun and ostracize him. But your neighbor does not care, and in any case you alone thus ‘punishing’ him makes little if any difference to him. You have to have the communal respect and authority, or you must turn to someone who does, to persuade and convince everyone or at least most of the members of your community to do likewise and make the bad neighbor a social outcast, so as to exert enough pressure on him to sell his property and leave.

The lesson? The peaceful cohabitation of neighbors and of people in regular direct contact with each other on some territory – a tranquil, convivial social order – requires also a commonality of culture: of language, religion, custom and convention. There can be peaceful co-existence of different cultures on distant, physically separated territories, but multi-culturalism, cultural heterogeneity, cannot exist in one and the same place and territory without leading to diminishing social trust, increased tension, and ultimately the call for a “strong man” and the destruction of anything resembling a libertarian social order.

And moreover: Just as a libertarian order must always be on guard against “bad” (even if non-aggressive) neighbors by means of social ostracism, i.e., by a common “you are *not* welcome here” culture, so, and indeed even more vigilantly so, must it be guarded against neighbors who openly advocate communism, socialism, syndicalism or democracy in any shape or form. They, in thereby posing an open threat to all private property and property owners, must not only be shunned, but they must, to use a by now somewhat famous Hoppe-meme, be “physically removed,” if need be by violence, and forced to leave for other pastures. Not to do so inevitably leads to – well, communism, socialism, syndicalism or democracy and hence, the very opposite of a libertarian social order.

With these “rightist” or as I would say, plain commonsensical insights in mind I turn now to the more challenging question of how to move from here, the *status quo*, to there. And for this it might be instructive to first briefly consider the answer given by the liberallala, the peace-love-and-liberty, the Friede-Freude-Eierkuchen or the capitalism-is-love libertarians. It reveals the same fundamental egalitarianism, if in a slightly different form, as that exhibited also by the live-and-let-live libertarians. These, as I have just tried to show, define what we may call the “bad neighbor problem” – and what is merely a short-hand for the general problem posed by the co-existence of distinctly different, alien, mutually disturbing, annoying, strange or hostile cultures – simply out of existence. And indeed, if you assume, against all empirical evidence, that all people, everywhere, are essentially the same, then, by definition, no such thing as a “bad neighbor problem” exists.

The same egalitarian, or as the liberallala-libertarians themselves prefer call it, “humanitarian” spirit also comes to bear in their answer to the question of a libertarian *strategy*. In a nutshell, their advice is this: be nice and talk to everyone – and then, in the long run, the better libertarian arguments will win out. To illustrate, take my former-friend-turned-foe Jeffrey Tucker’s five “Don’ts When Talking Liberty.” They are:

1. don’t be belligerent;
2. don’t presume hatred of liberty; 
3. don’t presume different goals;
4. don’t presume ignorance;
5. don’t regard anyone as an enemy.”

Now, quite apart from the fact that Tucker does not seem to follow his own advice in his belligerent condemnation of the entire Alt-Right as liberty-hating fascists, I find his exhortations truly astounding. They may be good advice vis-à-vis people just sprung up from nowhere, without any traceable history whatsoever, but vis-à-vis real people with a recorded history they strike me as hopelessly naïve, unrealistic, and outright counterproductive in the pursuit of libertarian ends. For I (and I assume everyone else here) know of and have met many people in my life who *are* ignorant, who *do* have different, un-libertarian goals, and who *do* hate liberty as understood by libertarians – and why in the world should I *not* regard such people as fools or enemies? And why should I *not* hate and *not* be belligerent vis-a-vis my enemies?

As a libertarian strategy, then, Tucker’s advice must be considered simply a bad joke. But surely it is good advice if one seeks entry into the State as some sort of “libertarian” advisor, and this may well explain the enthusiasm with which Tucker’s “humanitarian” libertarianism has been embraced by the entire liberallala-libertarian crowd.

Outside egalitarian phantasy lands, however, in the real world, libertarians must above all be *realistic* and recognize from the outset, as the Alt-Right does, the inequality not just of individuals but also of different cultures as an ineradicable *datum* of the human existence. We must further recognize that there exist plenty of enemies of liberty as defined by libertarianism and that they, not we, are in charge of worldly affairs; that in many parts of the contemporary world their control of the populace is so complete that the ideas of liberty and of a libertarian social order are practically unheard of or considered unthinkable[^18]; and that it is essentially only in the West, in the countries of Western and Central Europe and the lands settled by its people, that the idea of liberty is so deeply rooted that these enemies still can be openly challenged. And confining our strategic considerations here only to the West, then, we can identify, pretty much as the Alt-Right has effectively done, these actors and agencies as our principal enemies.

They are:

1. The ruling elites in control of the State apparatus and in particular the “Deep State” or the so-called “Cathedral” of the military, the secret services, the central banks and the supreme courts. As well, they include: 
    1. The leaders of the military-industrial complex, i.e., of nominally private firms that owe their very existence to the State as the exclusive or dominant buyer of their products;
    2. The leaders of the big commercial banks, which owe their privilege of creating money and credit out of thin air to the existence of the central bank and its role as a “lender of last resort”. They together, then, State, Big-Business and Big-Banking, form an extremely powerful even if tiny “mutual admiration society,” jointly ripping off the huge mass of tax-payers and living it up big time at their expense.
2. ([A] much larger group of enemies is made up of) the intellectuals, educators and “educrats,” from the highest levels of academia down to the level of elementary schools and kindergartens. Funded almost exclusively, whether directly or indirectly, by the State, they, in their overwhelming majority, have become the soft tools and willing executioners in the hands of the ruling elite and its designs for absolute power and total control.
3. The journalists of the MSM, as the docile products of the system of “public education,” and the craven recipients and popularizers of government “information.”

Equally important in the development of a libertarian strategy then is the immediately following next question: who are the *victims*? The standard libertarian answer to this is: the tax-*payers* as opposed to the tax-*consumers*. Yet while this is essentially correct, it is at best only part of the answer, and libertarians could learn something in this respect from the Alt-Right: because apart from the narrowly economic aspect there is also a wider cultural aspect that must be taken into account in identifying the victims.

In order to expand and increase its power, the ruling elites have been conducting for many decades what Pat Buchanan has identified as a systematic “culture war,” aimed at a trans-valuation of all values and the destruction of all natural, or if you will “organic” social bonds and institutions such as families, communities, ethnic groups and genealogically related nations, so as to create an increasingly atomized populace, whose only shared characteristic and unifying bond is its common existential dependency on the State. The first step in this direction, taken already half a century or even longer ago, was the introduction of “public welfare” and “social security.” Thereby, the underclass and the elderly were turned into State-dependents and the value and importance of family and community was correspondingly diminished and weakened. More recently, further-reaching steps in this direction have proliferated. A new “victimology” has been proclaimed and promoted. Women, and in particular single mothers, Blacks, Browns, Latinos, homosexuals, lesbians, bi- and transsexuals have been awarded “victim” status and accorded legal privileges through non-discrimination or affirmative action decrees. As well, most recently such privileges have been expanded also to foreign-national immigrants, whether legal or illegal, insofar as they fall into one of the just mentioned categories or are members of non-Christian religions such as Islam, for instance. The result? Not only has the earlier mentioned “bad neighbor problem” not been avoided or solved, but systematically promoted and intensified instead. Cultural homogeneity has been destroyed, and the freedom of association, and the voluntary physical segregation and separation of different people, communities, cultures and traditions has been replaced by an all-pervasive system of forced social integration. Moreover, each mentioned “victim” group has thus been pitted against every other, and all of them have been pitted against white, heterosexual, Christian males and in particular those married and with children as the only remaining, legally un-protected group of alleged “victimizers.” Hence, as the result of the trans-valuation of all values promoted by the ruling elites, the world has been turned upside down. The institution of a family household with father, mother and their children that has formed the basis of Western civilization, as the freest, most industrious, ingenious and all-around accomplished civilization known to mankind, i.e., the very institution and people that has done most good in human history, has been officially stigmatized and vilified as the source of all social ills and made the most heavily disadvantaged, even persecuted group by the enemy elites’ relentless policy of *divide et impera*.

Accordingly, given the present constellation of affairs, then, any promising libertarian strategy must, very much as the Alt-Right has recognized:

1. Be tailored and addressed to this group of the most severely victimized people. White married Christian couples with children, in particular if they belong also to the class of tax-*payers* (rather than tax-consumers), and everyone most closely resembling or aspiring to this standard form of social order and organization can be realistically expected to be the most receptive audience of the libertarian message[^19]. Given this constellation of perpetrator-enemies vs. victims in the contemporary West, then, I can now come to the final task of trying to outline a realistic libertarian strategy for change. The specifics of which will have to be prefaced by two general considerations. For one, given that the class of intellectuals from the tops of *academia* to the opinion-molding journalists in the MSM are funded by and firmly tied into the ruling system, i.e., that they are a part of the *problem*, they also should not be expected to play a major if any role in the problem’s *solution*. Accordingly, the so-called Hayekian strategy for social change, that envisions the spread of correct libertarian ideas starting at the top, with the leading philosophers, and then trickling down from there to journalists and finally to the great unwashed masses, must be considered fundamentally unrealistic. Instead, any realistic libertarian strategy for change must be a *populist* strategy. That is, libertarians must short-circuit the dominant intellectual elites and address the masses directly to arouse their indignation and contempt for the ruling elites.
2. All the while the main addressees of a populist libertarian message must be indeed the just mentioned groups of dispossessed and disenfranchised native whites, I believe it to be a serious strategic error to make “whiteness” the exclusive criterion on which to base one’s strategic decisions, as some strands of the Alt-Right have suggested to do. After all, it is above all white men that make up the ruling elite and that have foisted the current mess upon us. True enough, the various protected “minorities” mentioned before take full advantage of the legal privileges they have been accorded and they have become increasingly emboldened to ask for ever more “protection,” but none of them and all of them together did not and do not possess the intellectual prowess that would have made this outcome possible, if it were not for the instrumental help that they received and are receiving from white men.

Now, taking our cues from the Buchanan-, the Paul- and the Trump-movement, on to the specifics of a populist strategy for libertarian change, in no specific order except for the very first one, which has currently assumed the greatest urgency in the public mind.

#### Stop mass immigration

The waves of immigrants currently flooding the Western world have burdened it with hordes of welfare parasites, brought in terrorists, increased crime, led to the proliferation of no-go areas and resulted in countless “bad neighbors” who, based on their alien upbringing, culture and traditions, lack any understanding and appreciation of liberty and are bound to become mindless future supporters of welfare-Statism.

No one is against immigration and immigrants *per se*. But immigration must be by invitation only. All immigrants must be productive people and hence, be barred from all domestic welfare payments. To ensure this, they or their inviting party must place a bond with the community in which they are to settle, and which is to be forfeited and lead to the immigrant’s deportation should he ever become a public burden. As well, every immigrant, inviting party or employer should not only pay for the immigrant’s upkeep or salary, but must also pay the residential community for the additional wear and tear of its public facilities associated with the immigrant’s presence, so as to avoid the socialization of any and all costs incurred with his settlement. Moreover, even before his admission, every potential immigrant invitee must be carefully screened and tested not only for his productivity but also for cultural affinity (or “good neighborliness”) – with the empirically predictable result of mostly, but by no means exclusively, western-white immigrant-candidates. And any known communist or socialist, of any color, denomination or country of origin, must be barred from permanent settlement – unless, that is, the community where the potential immigrant wants to settle officially sanctions the looting of its residents’ property by new, foreign arrivals, which is not very likely to say the least (even within already existing ‘commie’ communes).[^20]

#### Stop attacking, killing and bombing people in foreign countries

A main cause, even if by no means the only one, for the current invasion of Western countries by hordes of alien immigrants, are the wars initiated and conducted in the Middle East and elsewhere by the US’ ruling elites and their subordinate Western puppet-elites. As well, the by now seemingly ‘normal’ and ubiquitous terrorist attacks in the name of Islam across the Western world are in large measure the “blow-back” of these wars and the ensuing chaos throughout the Middle East and Northern Africa. There should be no hesitation to call these Western rulers what they are: murderers or accessories to mass murder. We must demand, and cry out loud instead for a foreign policy of strict non-interventionism. Withdraw from all international and supranational organizations such as the UN, NATO and the EU that intricate one country into the domestic affairs of another. Stop all government-to-government aid and prohibit all weapon sales to foreign States. Let it be *America First!, England First!, Germany First!, Italy First!*, and so on, i.e., each country trading with one another and no one interfering in anyone else’s domestic affairs.

#### Defund the ruling elites and its intellectual bodyguards

Expose and widely publicize the lavish salaries, perks, pensions, side-deals, bribes and hush monies received by the ruling elites: by the higher-ups in government and governmental bureaucracies, of supreme courts, central banks, secret services and spy agencies, by politicians, parliamentarians, party leaders, political advisors and consultants, by crony-capitalists, “public educrats,” university presidents, provosts and academic “stars.” Drive home the point that all their shining glory and luxury is funded by money extorted from tax-payers, and consequently urge that any and all taxes be slashed: income taxes, property taxes, sales taxes, inheritance taxes, etc., etc..

#### End the FED and all central banks

The second source of funding for the ruling elites, besides the money extorted from the public in the form of taxes, comes from the central banks. Central banks are allowed to create paper money out of thin air. This reduces the purchasing power of money and destroys the savings of average people. It does not and cannot make society as a whole richer, but it redistributes income and wealth within society. The earliest receivers of the newly created money, i.e., the ruling elites, are thereby made richer and the later and latest receivers, i.e., the average citizen, are made poorer. Ang pagmamanipula ng sentral na bangko ng mga klase ng interes ay ang sanhi ng mga cycle ng boom-bust. Pinahihintulutan ng sentral na bangko ang akumulasyon ng kailanman mas malaki na "pampublikong utang" na inililipat bilang isang pasanin sa hindi kilalang mga nagbabayad ng buwis sa hinaharap o lumalaki lamang ang layo. At bilang facilitator ng pampublikong utang, ang mga bangko sentral ay ang mga facilitator ng mga digmaan. Ang kalakhan na ito ay dapat magtapos at mapapalitan ng isang sistema ng libre, mapagkumpitensyang pagbabangko na itinayo sa pundasyon ng isang tunay na pera ng kalakal tulad ng ginto o pilak.

#### Alisin ang lahat ng 'apirmatibong aksyon' at 'di-diskriminasyon' ng mga batas at regulasyon

Ang lahat ng gayong mga kautusan ay maliwanag na paglabag sa prinsipyo ng pagkakapantay-pantay sa harap ng batas na, hindi bababa sa Kanluran, ay madaling maunawaan at makilala bilang isang pangunahing alituntunin ng hustisya. Bilang mga may-ari ng pribadong ari-arian, ang mga tao ay dapat na malaya upang iugnay o i-disassociate sa iba: upang isama o ibukod, upang pagsamahin o ihiwalay, upang sumali o paghiwalayin, upang makiisa at isama o upang masira, lumabas at lumayo. Isara ang lahat ng mga departamento ng unibersidad para sa Itim-, Latino-, Kababaihan-, Kasarian-, Queer-Studies, atbp., Atbp, na hindi tumutugma sa agham at bale-walain ang mga kakayahan nito bilang mga intelektuwal na huwad o tampalasan. Gayunpaman, hinihiling na ang lahat ng mga komitment ng apirmatibong aksyon, pagkakaiba-iba at mga opisyal ng human resources, mula sa mga unibersidad hanggang sa mga paaralan at mga kindergarten, ay itatapon sa kalye at mapilit na matuto ng ilang kapaki-pakinabang na kalakalan.

#### Durugin ang "Anti-Pasista" pagkaguho

Ang trans-pagtatasa sa lahat ng mga halaga sa buong Kanluran: ang pag-imbento ng higit na "mga grupo ng biktima," ang pagkalat ng mga programang "apirmatibong aksyon" at ang walang humpay na pag-promote ng "pulitikal na katumpakan," ay humantong sa pagtaas ng isang "anti-pasista "Nagkakagulong mga tao. Ang sinasadyang suportado at di-tuwirang pinondohan ng mga naghaharing elite, ang inilarawan sa sarili na mga mandurumog ng "mga manggagawa sa katarungang panlipunan" ay nagsagawa ng tungkulin na palakasin ang labanan laban sa "puting pribilehiyo" sa pamamagitan ng sinasadya na mga kilos ng teror laban sa sinuman at anumang bagay na itinuturing na "rasista," "right-wing," pasista, "" reaksyunaryong, "" hindi nababagay "o" hindi na-itayong muli". Ang ganitong "mga kaaway ng progreso" ay pisikal na sinalakay ng mga "anti-pasistang" mandurumog, ang kanilang mga sasakyan ay nasunog, ang kanilang mga ari-arian ay inalis, at ang kanilang mga tagapag-empleyo ay nagbanta na bale-walain sila at sirain ang kanilang mga karera - habang ang pulis ay inutusan ng mga kapangyarihan na dapat "tumayo" at hindi upang siyasatin ang mga krimen na ginawa o pag-usigin at parusahan ang mga kriminal. Dahil sa pang-aalipusta na ito, dapat na pukawin ang pampublikong galit at dapat na umingay, malayo at malawak, para sa mga pulis na ilalabas at ang mga mandurumog na ito ay matalo sa pagsusumite.[^21]

#### Durugin ang mga kriminal sa kalye at mga gang

Sa pagbibigay ng prinsipyo ng pagkakapantay-pantay sa harap ng batas at pagbibigay ng lahat ng uri ng mga pribilehiyo ng grupo (maliban sa isang grupo ng may-asawa na puting mga Kristiyanong kalalakihan at kanilang mga pamilya) ang mga naghaharing elite ay nagbigay rin ng prinsipyo at pantay na kaparusahan para sa pantay na krimen. Ang ilang mga grupo na pinahalagahan ng Estado ay binibigyan ng mas mahigpit na kaparusahan para sa parehong krimen kaysa sa iba, at ang ilang partikular na pinapaboran ng grupo ay pinahihintulutan lamang na patakbuhin ang ligaw at halos walang kaparusahan, sa gayon ay aktwal at epektibong nagpapalaganap ng krimen. Gayundin, ang mga lugar na walang hangganan ay pinahihintulutan na bumuo kung saan ang anumang pagsisikap sa pagpapatupad ng batas ay talagang hindi na umiiral at kung saan kinuha ang marahas na mga mandaraya at gang ng kalye. Dahil dito, ang pampublikong kaguluhan ay dapat na pukawin at ito ay tiyak na hinihiling na ang pulis ay mabilis at mahigpit sa anumang magnanakaw, mugger, rapist at mamamatay-tao, at walang humpay na pagwawalang-bahala ang lahat ng mga kasalukuyang walang-pumunta sa lugar ng marahas na panuntunan sa gang. Hindi kailangang sabihin na ang pulisiyang ito ay dapat maging hindi malinaw, ngunit kung ito ay mangyayari, katulad na gumawa ng katotohanan, na ang lahat ng mga kriminal o mga miyembro ng gang ay mga batang itim o Latinong lalaki, o kaya sa Europa, mga batang lalaking imigrante galing sa Afrika, o sa gitnang silangan, ang mga Balkano o silangang Europa, mangyari ito at ang mga taong nilalang na ito ay dapat ang maging pinaka prominenteng makuha ang kanilang mga ilong na dumugo. At hindi rin dapat sabihin upang ipagtanggol laban sa krimen, kung ang ordinaryong krimen sa kalye o mga gawa ng terorismo, ang lahat ng mga pagbabawal laban sa pagmamay-ari ng mga baril sa pamamagitan ng matataas na mamamayan ay dapat na buwagin.

#### Iwaksi ang lahat ng mga parasitiko at kawikaan

Upang maging semento ang kanilang sariling posisyon, inilagay ng naghaharing uri ang underclass sa dole at sa gayon ay naging isang mas maaasahang pinagmumulan ng pampublikong suporta. Para tulungan ang mga tao na tumaas at umakyat mula sa underclass upang maging mga self-supporting actor, ang totoong - at tunay na nilalayon - ang epekto ng tinatawag na "social policy" ng Estado ay ang eksaktong kabaligtaran. Nagbibigay ito ng katayuan ng underclass ng isang tao na mas permanente at nagpapalakas sa underclass (at kasama rin dito ang bilang ng mga social worker at mga therapist na pinondohan ng buwis na itinalaga sa "tulong at pagtulong" nito). Dahil, alinsunod sa hindi maaaring palitan na pang-ekonomiyang batas, ang bawat subsidy na ipinagkaloob sa account para sa ilang mga dapat na mga pangangailangan o mga kakulangang gumagawa ng higit pa, hindi bababa ang problemang ito ay dapat na pinagaan o alisin. Sa gayon, ang ugat na sanhi ng kondisyon ng underclass ng isang tao: ang kanyang mababang kontrol sa salpok at pagnanais ng mataas na panahon, ibig sabihin, ang kanyang walang pagpipigil na pagnanais para sa instant na kasiyahan, at ang iba't ibang nagpapakita ng mga naturang dahilan, tulad ng kawalan ng trabaho, kahirapan, alkoholismo, pang-aabuso sa droga, karahasan, diborsyo, mga kababaihan na pinamumunuan ng mga kababaihan, mga pagpapakasal ng kapanganakan, pagsasama ng mga tao, pang-aabuso sa bata, pagpapabaya at menor de edad na krimen, ay at hindi nilinis o nawala ngunit pinatibay at itinataguyod. Sa halip na magpatuloy at palawakin ang mga mahihirap na kalamidad sa lipunan, dapat itong buwagin at kusang ipagtanggol na mag-ingat sa bibliya na pagpapayo na maaaring siya, ngunit hindi gagana, hindi dapat kumain, at hindi talaga Siya maaaring Magtrabaho, dahil sa matinding kaisipan o pisikal na kapansanan, ay dapat inaalagaan ng pamilya, komunidad at boluntaryong mga kawanggawa.

#### Kunin ang Estado sa labas ng edukasyon

Karamihan, kung hindi lahat, mga social pathology na sinadya ang Western kontemporaryong may mga ugat sa institusyong "pampublikong edukasyon". Nang ang unang mga hakbang ay kinuha, higit sa dalawang siglo na ang nakalilipas, sa Prussia, upang palakihin at sa huli ay palitan ang dating ganap na privatized na sistema ng edukasyon na may isang unibersal na sistema ng sapilitang "pampublikong edukasyon," ang oras na ginugol sa mga paaralan na pinatatakbo ng Estado sa maraming mga kaso ay hindi lalampas sa apat na taon. Sa ngayon, sa buong daigdig ng Kanluran, ang oras na ginugol sa mga "pampublikong edukasyon" ng mga institusyon ay, sa pinakamaliit, sa sampung taon, at sa maraming kaso, at lumalago, dalawampu o tatlumpung taon. Iyon ay, ang isang malaki o kahit na ang pinakamalaking bahagi ng panahon sa panahon ng pinaka-formative na panahon sa buhay ng isang tao ay ginugol at pinondohan ng Estado at pinangangasiwaan ng institusyon ng Estado, na ang pangunahing layunin mula sa simula ay * hindi * upang itaguyod ang isang napaliwanagan na publiko, ngunit upang sanayin ang mga "mahusay na sundalo" at "mga mahusay na pampublikong tagapaglingkod:" hindi malaya at mature o "mündige Bürger," subordinate at servile "Staats-Bürger."? Nagtatrabaho ang indoctrination: mas matagal na oras na ginugol ng isang tao sa loob ng sistema ng pampublikong edukasyon, lalong nakatuon siya sa mga ideyalistang leftist-egalitarian ay swallowed at buong puso na nauunawaan ang opisyal na doktrina at adyenda ng "pulitika ng katarungan." Sa katunayan, partikular sa mga guro ang agham panlipunan at mga propesor, ang mga tao ay *hindi*ang pagbilang ng kanilang mga sarili bilang bahagi ng Kaliwa ay halos hindi umiiral. Dahil dito, ang kontrol sa mga paaralan at unibersidad ay dapat lumayo mula sa sentral na Estado at, sa unang hakbang, ibabalik sa lokal at mga lokal na pinondohan ng awtoridad na rehiyon o mas mabuti pa, sa huli ay ganap na nakarehistro, upang palitan ang isang sistema ng maihahambing pagkapantay at pagsang-ayon sa isang sistema ng desentralisadong edukasyon na sumasalamin sa likas na pagkakaiba-iba, pagpaparami at pagkakaiba-iba ng mga talento at interes ng tao.

#### Huwag ilagay ang iyong tiwala sa pulitika o mga partidong pampulitika

Tulad ng*akademya*at ang akademikong mundo ay malamang na hindi maglaro ng anumang makabuluhang papel sa isang libertarian na diskarte para sa pagbabago ng lipunan, kaya sa pulitika at mga partidong pampulitika - pagkatapos, ito ang pangwakas na layunin ng libertarianism upang tapusin sa lahat ng pulitika, at sumasailalim sa lahat ng ugnayan ng tao at mga kontrahan sa pribadong batas at mga pamamaraan ng batas sibil. Siguraduhing, sa ilalim ng kasalukuyang, lahat ng mga pulitikal na kondisyon ng partido ay hindi maaaring lubusang maiiwasan ang partisipasyon ng partido. Gayunpaman, sa anumang naturang kaguluhan, dapat isaalang-alang ng mabuti at bantayan ang masasamang impluwensiya ng kapangyarihan at ang pang-akit ng pera at mga perks na kasama nito. At upang mabawasan ang panganib at tukso na ito, ang mga pagsisikap ng rehiyon at lokal ay dapat na hinahangad kaysa sa pambansang pulitika, at doon upang itaguyod ang radikal na adyenda ng desentralisasyon: isang pagpapaalis at tahimik na paghihiwalay, pahiwalay at paghihiwalay. Gayunpaman, ang pinakamahalaga, dapat nating pag-aralan ang motto ng buhay ni Ludwig von Mises: Huwag magpadala sa kasamaan, ngunit patuloy na maging mas matapang laban dito. Iyon ay, kailangan nating magsalita kailan man at saanman, maging sa pormal o di-pormal na mga pagtitipon, laban sa sinumang patting sa atin ngayon lamang sa pamamagitan ng pamilyar na "pulitikal na tama" na mga pulutong at walang -Bold balderdash at malinaw na nagsasabi: "Hindi. Hell no. Dapat kang sumang-ayon. "Sa parehong oras, ang naghaharing elites, *akademya* at ang MSM ay binigyan ng isang kumpletong ideya, ito ay nangangailangan ng isang magandang bahagi ng lakas ng loob na gawin ito. Ngunit kung hindi tayo sapat na matapang upang gawin ito ngayon at sa gayon magtakda ng isang halimbawa para sundan ng iba, ang mga bagay ay lalong mas masahol at mas mapanganib sa hinaharap, at kami, ang Western sibilisasyon at ang mga Western na ideya ng Kalayaan at kalayaan ay wiped out at maglaho.

[^1]: Iyon ay dapat na nakalaan sa ating sariling likas na paraan, i.e., un-allocated, katawan.

[^2]: Ari-arian.

[^3]: Walang salungatan.

[^4]: Ang lahat ng may-ari nito ay libre sa isang chain ng boluntaryong palitan.

[^5]: Kaninong pamunuan, sa kredito nito, matapos ang tagumpay ng halalan ni Trump, mabilis na sinira si Trump nang siya ay naging isa pang prime presidential president.

[^6]: *Aka* Mencius Moldbug.

[^7]: *Aka* Soviet Poverty Lie Center.

[^8]: *Aka* “di-diskriminasyon”.

[^9]: Na aking tinawag na "Stupid para sa Kalayaan" at ang aking batang Aleman na kaibigan na si Andre Lichtschlag bilang "Liberallala-Libertaryan".

[^10]: Colin Robertson.

[^11]: Alin, siyempre, ang dahilan kung bakit inanyayahan sila dito.

[^12]: Na ganap na katugma sa libertarianism at ang *desideratum* ang kalayaan ng asosasyon at pagsalungat sa pinilit na pagsasama.

[^13]: Na kung saan ay antitetiko sa libertarianism at ipinagmamalaki sa kasaganaan ng tao.

[^14]: Hayaan akong magmadali upang idagdag dito na, sa kabila ng aking mga misgivings tungkol sa kanyang "ekonomya," itinuturing ko pa rin si Pat Buchanan na isang mabuting tao.

[^15]: Isang pagsisikap, sa pamamagitan ng paraan, iyon ay libakin sa pamamagitan ng Taki Theodoracopulos, isang beteranong kampeon ng kilusan paleo-konserbatibo-nakabukas-Alt-Right at dating amo ni Spencer.

[^16]: Maraming mga kabataan ay nauna nang naaakit sa libertarianism na naniniwala na ang "mabuhay at ipaalam na mabuhay" ay ang kakanyahan ng libertarianism.

[^18]: Maliban sa ilang mga walang ginagawang intelekwal na maglaro o mental na himnastiko sa pamamagitan ng ilang "kakaiba" na indibidwal.

[^19]: Habang ang hindi bababa sa suporta ay dapat na inaasahan mula sa legal na pinaka-protektadong mga grupo tulad ng, halimbawa, nag-iisang ina ng Black Muslim sa kapakanan.

[^20]: Maikling mensahe sa lahat ng mga bukas-na hangganan at liberallala libertaryan, sino ang tiyak na lagyan ito, nahulaan mo ito, "pasista": Sa isang ganap na privatized na pagkakasunud-sunod ng libertaryan na walang ganoong bagay bilang isang karapatan para sa libreng imigrasyon. Ang pribadong ari-arian ay nagpapahiwatig ng mga hangganan at ang karapatan ng may-ari na ibukod ang kalooban. At ang "pampublikong ari-arian" ay may mga hangganan din. Ito ay walang pag-aari. Ito ay ang ari-arian ng mga nagbabayad ng pambuwis sa buwis at hindi talaga ang ari-arian ng mga dayuhan. At habang totoo na ang Estado ay isang kriminal na organisasyon at na ipagkatiwala ito sa gawain ng kontrol sa hangganan ay hindi maaaring hindi magreresulta sa maraming mga kawalang-katarungan sa parehong mga residente at dayuhan sa ibang bansa, totoo rin na ang Estado *ay may isang bagay* rin kapag nagpasya na *huwag* gawin ang anumang bagay tungkol sa kontrol sa hangganan at na, sa ilalim ng mga kasalukuyang kalagayan, walang ginagawa sa bagay na ito ay hahantong sa kahit na higit pa at mas maraming mga masalimuot na kawalang-katarungan, lalo na sa domestikong mamamayan.

[^21]: Tanong para sa liberallala-libertaryan at Stupid para sa kalayaan, na siguradong tututulan ang pangangailangan na ito sa lupa na hiniling ng pulisya na durugin ang "anti-pasistang" mga mandurumog ay *Estado-_polisya: parehong mga dahilan, na ang mga pulis ay arestuhin ang mga mamamatay-tao o mga rapist? Hindi ba ang mga lehitimong gawain na ito ay ginanap din sa anumang libertaryan kaayusan ng _pribado* na pulisya? At kung ang pulis ay hindi dapat gumawa ng anumang bagay tungkol sa mga mandurumog na ito, hindi ba ito ayos kung gayon ang target ng pag-atake nito, ang "racist Right," ay dapat gawin ang gawain sa sarili ng pagbibigay ng "mga mandirigma ng katarungang panlipunan" na isang duguan na ilong?