### Dari Deposit dan Pinjaman Perbankan untuk Pecahan Reserve Perbankan: Penurunan Kredit
Bank melakukan dua ketat yang terpisah tugas, hanya satu yang telah dianggap begitu jauh.[^20] Pada satu tangan, mereka melayani sebagai deposit institusi, menawarkan keselamatan dan perkhidmatan penjelasan. Mereka menerima deposit (komoditi) uang dan isu tuntutan untuk wang (resit gudang; uang pengganti) mereka penyimpan, ditebus pada par dan pada permintaan. Untuk setiap tuntutan untuk wang yang dikeluarkan oleh mereka, mereka mengadakan setara jumlah uang asli di tangan, siap untuk penebusan (100 peratus reserve perbankan). Tiada faedah yang dibayar kepada deposit. Sebaliknya, penyimpan membayar yuran ke bank untuk menyediakan tempat penyimpanan dan perkhidmatan penjelasan. Bawah keadaan persaingan bebas—bebas masuk ke dalam industri perbankan—deposit bayaran, yang merupakan hasil bank dan mungkin sumber keuntungan, cenderung untuk menjadi minimum bayaran; dan keuntungan—atau sebaliknya, untuk kepentingan kembali payah dalam perbankan cenderung untuk menjadi sama seperti di apa-apa lain, nonbanking industri.

Di sisi lain, asalnya yang terpisah sama sekali institusi dari deposit institusi, bank juga berfungsi sebagai perantara antara penyimpan dan pelabur—sebagai pinjaman bank. Ini fungsi mereka tawaran pertama dan masukkan ke dalam masa-kontrak dengan penyimpan. Penyimpan pinjaman uang kepada bank untuk tertentu—yang lebih pendek atau lebih lama—masa dalam pertukaran untuk bank kontrak kewajiban masa depan balik ditambah beberapa tambahan menarik kembali. Dari pandangan penyimpan, mereka pertukaran hadir wang untuk janji masa depan wang: kepentingan kembali membentuk pahala mereka untuk melakukan fungsi menunggu. Setelah itu memperoleh sementara milik simpanan dari penyimpan, bank kemudian reloans wang yang sama untuk pelabur (termasuk dirinya sendiri) dalam pertukaran untuk latters' kewajiban masa depan balik dan menarik. Kepentingan diferensial—perbezaan antara faedah yang dibayar kepada penyimpan dan yang dikenakan untuk peminjam—mewakili harga untuk intermediating antara penyimpan dan pelabur dan merupakan pinjaman bank pendapatan. Sebagai deposit perbankan dan deposit bayaran, di bawah keadaan yang kompetitif kos perantaraan juga cenderung untuk menjadi minimum kos, dan keuntungan dari pinjaman perbankan begitu juga cenderung untuk menjadi sama seperti orang-orang yang boleh diperolehi di tempat lain.

Tidak deposit perbankan tidak pinjaman perbankan seperti yang ditandai di sini melibatkan peningkatan dalam wang bekalan atau unilateral pendapatan atau kekayaan agihan. Untuk setiap baru dikeluarkan deposit perhatikan setara jumlah wang yang diambil dari peredaran yang (hanya bentuk uang perubahan, tidak kuantiti), dan dalam perjalanan pinjaman perbankan jumlah yang sama uang semata-mata bertukar tangan berkali-kali. Semua bursa—antara penyimpan dan menyimpan institusi serta antara penyimpan, intermediating bank dan pelabur—yang saling menguntungkan.

Sebaliknya, pecahan reserve perbankan melibatkan sengaja kebingungan antara deposit dan pinjaman fungsi. Ia menunjukkan peningkatan dalam bekalan wang, dan ia membawa kepada pihak pendapatan redistribusi di bank memihak serta untuk ekonomi ketidakcekapan dalam bentuk boom-payudara kitaran perniagaan.

Kekeliruan kedua-dua fungsi perbankan datang untuk cahaya dalam fakta bahawa di bawah pecahan reserve perbankan, sama ada penyimpan sedang faedah yang dibayar (bukannya untuk membayar yuran), dan/atau penyimpan diberikan hak pengeluaran segera (bukannya menunggu dengan mereka meminta untuk penebusan sehingga dinyatakan masa depan date). Secara teknis, kemungkinan bank terlibat dalam apa-apa amalan timbul daripada fakta yang pemegang deposit permintaan (tuntutan untuk wang ditebus pada permintaan, dengan serta-merta, pada par) biasanya tidak ** menjalankan mereka tepat pada masa yang sama, seperti yang mereka semua mendekati bank dengan permintaan untuk penebusan pada masa yang sama. Dengan itu, deposit di bank biasanya akan memegang sejumlah berhak (wang betul) melebihi sebenar harian pengeluaran. Ia menjadi itu layak untuk bank untuk pinjaman ini "melebihi" simpanan untuk peminjam, itu pendapatan bank kepentingan kembali (mana bank kemudian mungkin sebahagian lulus pada kepada penyimpan dalam bentuk menarik membayar deposit akaun).

Penyokong pecahan reserve perbankan biasanya tuntutan yang ini amalan memegang kurang dari 100 peratus berhak mewakili semata-mata yang berbahaya wang "penghematan," dan mereka suka menunjukkan bahwa bukan hanya bank, tetapi penyimpan (menerima menarik) dan penyimpan (menerima pengeluaran segera hak) keuntungan dari berlatih juga. Sebenarnya, pecahan reserve perbankan mengalami dua saling membawa maut kelemahan dan adalah apa-apa tapi tidak berbahaya dan semua-sekitar bermanfaat. Pertama-tama, ia harus berkata apa-apa kurang dari 100 peratus reserve deposit perbankan melibatkan apa yang mungkin panggilan undang-undang kemustahilan, untuk dalam menggunakan berlebihan berhak untuk memberikan kredit, bank benar-benar pemindahan sementara pemilikan mereka untuk beberapa peminjam, sementara penyimpan, berhak seperti mereka untuk segera penebusan, mengekalkan pemilikan mereka lebih dana yang sama. Bagaimanapun, ia adalah mustahil bahwa untuk beberapa waktu penyimpan ** peminjam berhak untuk eksklusif kawalan ke atas sumber yang sama. Dua individu *tidak boleh* eksklusif pemilik salah satu dan hal yang sama pada waktu yang sama. Sewajarnya mana-mana bank berpura-pura jika tidak—dalam menganggap permintaan liabiliti melebihi sebenar simpanan—harus dianggap sebagai bertindak fraud. Obligasi kontrak *tidak boleh* dipenuhi. Dari awal lagi, bank itu harus dianggap sebagai memang bangkrut—seperti yang diturunkan oleh kenyataan bahawa ia tidak bertentangan dengan sendiri anggapan, menahan sebuah bank mungkin lari.

Kedua, dalam pinjaman yang berlebihan berhak untuk peminjam, bank meningkatkan penawaran wang, tanpa mengira sama ada peminjam menerima ini berhak dalam bentuk uang betul atau di deposit permintaan (memeriksa rekening). Jika pinjaman mengambil bentuk uang asli, maka jumlah wang yang betul dalam peredaran meningkat tanpa mengeluarkan setara jumlah wang yang pengganti dari peredaran dan jika ia mengambil bentuk akaun memeriksa, kemudian jumlah wang yang pengganti adalah meningkat tanpa mengambil jumlah yang sama uang asli yang keluar dari sirkulasi. Dalam kedua kasus, ada akan lebih banyak wang dalam wujud sekarang daripada sebelumnya, terkemuka untuk pengurangan dalam kuasa membeli wang (inflasi) dan, tentu saja, untuk seorang sistematik redistribusi nyata pendapatan memihak bank dan peminjam pelanggan dan mengorbankan nonbank awam dan semua pelanggan bank. Bank menerima kepentingan tambahan pendapatan sementara ia membuat tambahan sumbangan apapun untuk kekayaan sebenar nonbank awam (seperti yang akan berlaku jika kepentingan kembali adalah keputusan yang berkurang bank perbelanjaan, iaitu, simpanan); dan peminjam memperoleh nyata, nonmonetary aset dengan dana mereka, dengan itu mengurangkan kekayaan nyata yang lain awam dengan jumlah yang sama.

Selain itu, sejauh yang bank tidak hanya menghabiskan berlebihan berhak pada penggunaan sendiri tetapi bukannya pinjaman mereka keluar terhadap biaya bunga, selalu perniagaan kitaran yang ditetapkan dalam gerakan.[^21] kuantiti kredit yang ditawarkan adalah lebih besar daripada sebelumnya. Akibatnya, harga kredit—faedah yang dikenakan untuk pinjaman—akan jatuh di bawah apa yang jika tidak akan pernah. Pada harga yang lebih rendah, lebih kredit diambil. Sejak uang tidak dapat berkembang biak lebih banyak uang, untuk dapat untuk mendapatkan kepentingan kembali dan murni keuntungan di atas itu, peminjam akan mempunyai untuk menukar mereka dipinjam ke dalam pelaburan. Itu adalah, mereka akan mempunyai untuk membeli atau sewa faktor pengeluaran—tanah, buruh, dan mungkin barang-barang modal (dihasilkan faktor pengeluaran)—yang mampu menghasilkan masa depan output dari barang-barang yang nilai (harga) melebihi yang input. Dengan itu dengan jumlah berkembang kredit, lebih banyak saat ini sumber daya yang tersedia akan terikat dalam pengeluaran *masa depan* barang-barang (bukannya digunakan untuk hadir penggunaan) daripada yang jika tidak akan telah; dan untuk menyelesaikan semua pelaburan projek sekarang di bawah jalan, lebih banyak masa yang akan diperlukan dari itu diperlukan untuk menyelesaikan hanya orang-orang yang telah dimulai tanpa pengembangan kredit. Semua masa depan barang-barang yang telah dibuat tanpa pengembangan plus orang-orang yang baru berkata pada pengembangan kredit harus dihasilkan.

However, in distinct contrast to the situation in which the interest rate falls due to a fall in the rate of time preference (the degree to which present goods are preferred over future goods), and hence where the public has in fact saved more so as to make a larger fund of present goods available to investors in exchange for their promise of a return of future goods, no such change in time preference and savings has taken place in the case under consideration. The public has *not* saved more, and accordingly, the additional amount of credit granted by the bank does not represent *commodity credit* (credit covered by nonmoney goods which the public has abstained from consuming), but it is *fiduciary* or *circulation credit* (credit that has been literally created out of thin air—without any corresponding sacrifice, in the form of nonconsumed nonmoney goods, on the part of the creditor).[^22] Had the additional credit been commodity credit, an expanded volume of investment activities would have been warranted. There would have been a sufficiently large supply of present goods that could be devoted to the production of future goods such that all—the old as well as the newly begun—investment projects could be successfully completed and a higher level of future consumption attained. If the credit expansion is due to the granting of circulation credit, however, the ensuing volume of investment must actually prove overambitious. Misled by a lower interest rate, investors act *as if* savings had increased. They withdraw more of the presently available resources for investment projects, to be converted into future capital goods, than is warranted in light of actual savings. Consequently, capital goods prices will increase initially relative to consumer goods prices, but once the public’s underlying time preference rate begins to reassert itself, a systematic shortage of consumer goods will arise. Accordingly, the interest rate will adjust upward, and it is now consumer goods prices which rise relative to capital goods prices, requiring the liquidation of part of the investment as unsustainable malinvestment. The earlier boom will turn bust, reducing the future standard of living below the level that otherwise could have been reached.

Among recent proponents of fractional reserve banking the cases of Lawrence White and George Selgin[^23] deserve a few critical comments, if for no other reason than that both are critics of Friedmanite monetarism who hark back, instead, to the tradition of Austrian and in particular Misesian monetary theory.[^24] Their monetary ideal is a universal commodity money such as an international gold standard and, based on this, a system of competitive banking which, they claim, would—and should be permitted to do so for reasons of economic efficiency as well as justice—engage in fractional reserve banking and the granting of fiduciary credit.

As to the question of justice, White and Selgin offer but one argument destined to show the allegedly nonfraudulent character of fractional reserves: that outlawing such a practice would involve a violation of the principle of freedom of contract by preventing “banks and their customers from making whatever sorts of contractual arrangements are mutually agreeable.”[^25] Yet this is surely a silly argument. First off, as a matter of historical fact fractional reserve banks never informed their depositors that some or all of their deposits would actually be loaned out and hence could not possibly be ready for redemption at any time. (Even if the bank were to pay interest on deposit accounts, and hence it *should* have been clear that the bank *must* loan out deposits, this does not imply that any of the depositors actually understand this fact. Indeed, it is safe to say that few if any do, even among those who are not economic illiterates.) Nor did fractional reserve banks inform their borrowers that some or all of the credit granted to them had been created out of thin air and was subject to being recalled at any time. How, then, can their practice be called anything but fraud and embezzlement!

Second, and more decisive, to believe that fractional reserve banking should be regarded as falling under and protected by the principle of freedom of contract involves a complete misunderstanding of the very meaning of this principle. Freedom of contract does not imply that *every* mutually advantageous contract should be permitted. Clearly, if A and B contractually agree to rob C, this would not be in accordance with the principle. Freedom of contract means instead that A and B should be allowed to make any contract whatsoever *regarding their own properties*, yet fractional reserve banking involves the making of contracts regarding the property of third parties. Whenever the bank loans its “excess” reserves to a borrower, such a bilateral contract affects the property of third parties in a threefold way. First, by thereby increasing the money supply, the purchasing power of all other money owners is reduced; second, all depositors are harmed because the likelihood of their successfully recovering their own possessions is lowered; and third, all other borrowers—borrowers of commodity credit—are harmed because the injection of fiduciary credit impairs the safety of the entire credit structure and increases the risk of a business failure for every investor of commodity credit.

In order to overcome these objections to the claim that fractional reserve banking accords with the principle of freedom of contract, White and Selgin then, as their last line of defense, withdraw to the position that banks may attach an “option clause” to their notes, informing depositors that the bank may at any time suspend or defer redemption, and letting borrowers know that their loans may be instantly recalled.[^26] While such a practice would indeed dispose of the charge of fraud, it is subject to another fundamental criticism, for such notes would no longer be *money* but a peculiar form of *lottery tickets*.[^27] It is the function of money to serve as the most easily resalable and most widely acceptable good, so as to prepare its owner for instant purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at not yet known future dates; hence, whatever may serve as money so as to be instantly resalable at any future point in time, it must be something that bestows an *absolute* and *unconditional* property right on its owner. In sharp contrast, the owner of a note to which an option clause is attached does *not* possess an unconditional property title. Rather, similar to the holder of a “fractional reserve parking ticket” (where more tickets are sold than there are parking places on hand, and lots are allocated according to a “first-come-firstserved” rule), he is merely entitled to participate in the drawing of certain prizes, consisting of ownership or time-rental services to specified goods according to specified rules. But as drawing rights—and not unconditional ownership titles—they only possess *temporally conditional* value until the time of the drawing, and they become worthless as soon as the prizes have been allocated to the ticket holders; thus, they would be uniquely *un*suited to serve as a medium of exchange.

As regards the second contention: that fractional reserve banking is economically efficient, it is noteworthy to point out that White, although he is undoubtedly familiar with the Austrian-Misesian claim that *any* injection of fiduciary credit must result in a boom-bust cycle, nowhere even mentions the problem of business cycles. Only Selgin addresses the problem. In his attempt to show that fractional reserve banking does not cause business cycles, however, Selgin then falls headlong into the fundamental Keynesian error of confusing the demand for money (determined by the utility of money) and savings (determined by time preference).[^28]

According to Selgin, “to hold inside money is to engage in voluntary saving”; and accordingly “an increase in the demand for money warrants an increase in bank loans and investments” because

> [w]henever a bank expands its liabilities in the process of making new loans and investments, it is the holders of the liabilities who are the ultimate lenders of credit, and what they lend are the real resources they could acquire if, instead of holding money, they spent it.[^29]

Based on this view of the holding of money as representing saving and an increased demand for money as being the same thing as increased saving, then, Selgin goes on to criticize Mises’s claim that *any* issuance of fiduciary media, in lowering the interest rate below its “natural” level, must cause a business cycle as “confused.” “No ill consequences result from the issue of fiduciary media in response to a greater demand for balances of inside money.”[^30]

Yet the confusion is all Selgin’s. First off, it is false to say that the holding of money (the act of not spending it), is equivalent to saving. One might as well say—and this would be equally wrong—that the not-spending of money is equivalent to *not* saving. In fact, saving is not-consuming, and the demand for money has nothing to do with saving or not-saving. The demand for money is the unwillingness to buy or rent nonmoney goods, and these include consumer goods (present goods) *and* capital goods (future goods). Not-spending money is to purchase, *neither* consumer goods *nor* investment goods. Contrary to Selgin, then, matters are as follows: Individuals may employ their monetary assets in one of three ways. They can spend them on consumer goods; they can spend them on investment; or they can keep them in the form of cash. There are no other alternatives. While a person must at all times make decisions regarding three margins at once, invariably the outcome is determined by two distinct and praxeologically unrelated factors. The consumption/investment proportion (the decision of how much of one’s money to spend on consumption and how much on investment) is determined by a person’s time preference (the degree to which he prefers present consumption over future consumption). On the other hand, the source of his demand for cash is the utility attached to money (the personal satisfaction derived from money in allowing him immediate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates).

Accordingly, if the demand for money increases while the social stock of money is given, this additional demand can only be satisfied by bidding down the money prices of nonmoney goods. The purchasing power of money will increase, the *real* value of individual cash balances will be raised, and at a higher purchasing power per unit money, the demand for and the supply of money will once again be equilibrated. The relative price of money versus nonmoney will have changed. But unless time preference is assumed to have changed at the same time, *real* consumption and *real* investment will remain the same as before: the additional money demand is satisfied by reducing nominal consumption *and* investment spending in accordance with the same pre-existing consumption/investment proportion, driving the money prices of both consumer as well as producer goods down and leaving real consumption and investment at precisely their old levels. If time preference is assumed to change concomitantly with an increased demand for money, however, then everything is possible. Indeed, if spending were reduced exclusively on investment goods, an increased demand for money could even go hand in hand with an increase in the rate of interest and reduced saving and investment. However, this, or the equally possible opposite outcome, would not be due to a change in the demand for money but exclusively to a change (a rise, or a fall) in the time preference schedule. In any case, if the banking system were to follow Selgin’s advice and accommodate an increased demand for cash by issuing fiduciary credit, the social rate of time preference would be falsified, excessive investment would result, and a boom-bust cycle would be set in motion, rendering the practice of fractional reserve banking fraudulent *as well as* economically inefficient.

White’s and Selgin’s proposal of a commodity money based system of competitive fractional reserve banking—of partial fiat money—is neither just (and hence the term “free banking” is inappropriate), nor does it produce economic stability. It is no fundamental improvement as compared to the monetarist reality of monopolistically issued pure fiat currencies. Indeed, in one respect Friedman’s pure fiat money proposal contains a more realistic and correct analysis than White’s and Selgin’s because Friedman recognizes “what used to be called ‘the inherent instability’ of fractional reserve banking,” and he understands that this inherent instability of competitive fractional reserve banking will sooner or later collapse in a “liquidity crisis” and then lead to his favored regime—a governmentally provided pure fiat currency—anyway.[^31]

Only a system of universal commodity money (gold), competitive banks, *and* 100-percent-reserve deposit banking with a strict functional separation of loan and deposit banking constitutes a just monetary system that can assure economic stability and present a genuine answer to the current monetarist fiasco.

[^20]: On the following see in particular Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Synder, 1983); idem, *The Case for a 100 Percent Gold Dollar* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1991); Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*; idem, *Human Action*; also Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); S. Koch, *Fractional Reserve Banking: A Practical Critique* (Master’s thesis, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 1992).

[^21]: On the theory of the business cycle see in particular Ludwig von Mises, *Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik* (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928); idem, *Human Action*, chap. 20; F.A. Hayek, *Prices and Production* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1931); Murray N. Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975).

[^22]: On the fundamental distinction between commodity credit and circulation credit, see Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 263ff.

[^23]: See Lawrence White, *Competition and Currency* (New York: New York University Press, 1989); George Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking* (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988).

[^24]: For a critique of White and Selgin as misinterpreting the fundamental thrust of Mises’s theory of money and banking see Joseph Salerno, “The Concept of Coordination in Austrian Macroeconomics,” in *Austrian Economics: Perspectives on the Past and Prospects for the Future*, Richard Ebeling, ed. (Hillsdale, Mich.: Hillsdale College Press, 1991); idem, “Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 (1993): 113–46.

[^25]: White, *Competition and Currency*, p. 156, also pp. 55–56; George Selgin, “Short-Changed in Chile: The Truth about the Free-Banking Episode,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter/Spring, 1990): 5.

[^26]: White, *Currency and Competition*, p. 157; Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 137.

[^27]: See Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” p. 30.

[^28]: For a critique of this error see Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 39–43; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Theory of Employment, Money Interest, and the Capitalist Process: The Misesian Case Against Keynes,” in *The Economics and Ethics of Private Property*, Hoppe, ed. (Boston: Kluwer, 1993), pp. 119–20, 137–38.

[^29]: Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 55.

[^30]: Ibid., pp. 61–62.

[^31]: See Friedman and Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?”
