Tetapi teori barang awam yang rosak bukan sahaja kerana rosak taakulan moral yang tersirat di dalamnya. Walaupun keperluan utilitarian, ekonomi hujah terkandung dalam hujah di atas adalah terang-terangan salah. Seperti teori barang awam menyatakan, ia juga mungkin bahawa ia akan menjadi lebih baik untuk mempunyai barang-barang awam daripada untuk memilikinya, walaupun ia tidak harus melupakan bahawa tidak seperti sebab wujud bahawa ini mesti menjadi lebih daripada keperluan (yang kemudian akan berakhir dengan barang-barang awam ahli-ahli teori penalaran di sini). Kerana ia boleh dilakukan dengan jelas, dan sememangnya diketahui sebagai suatu fakta, bahawa anarkis wujud yang begitu amat suka tindakan negeri yang mereka suka tidak mempunyai barang-barang awam yang kononnya sekali untuk mempunyai mereka disediakan oleh kerajaan.[^16] Di mana-mana, bahkan jika argumen mengakui begitu jauh, untuk melompat dari kenyataan bahwa barang-barang awam adalah wajar untuk kenyataan bahawa mereka itu harus diberikan oleh negara adalah apa-apa tapi konklusif, seperti ini bukanlah pilihan dengan yang satu berhadapan. Since money or other resources must be withdrawn from possible alternative uses to finance the supposedly desirable public goods, the only relevant and appropriate question is whether or not these alternative uses to which the money could be put (that is, the private goods which could have been acquired but now cannot be bought because the money is being spent on public goods instead) are more valuable—more urgent—than the public goods. And the answer to this question is perfectly clear. Dalam segi pengguna penilaian, bagaimanapun tinggi mutlak tahap mungkin, nilai awam barang-barang yang agak lebih rendah daripada yang bersaing barang-barang peribadi karena jika salah telah meninggalkan pilihan untuk pengguna (dan tidak dipaksa satu alternatif kepada mereka), mereka ternyata lebih suka menghabiskan uang mereka berbeda (jika tidak ada kuasa yang telah perlu). Ini membuktikan apa-apa di luar ragu-ragu bahawa sumber yang digunakan untuk menyediakan barang-barang awam adalah sia-sia karena mereka menyediakan pengguna dengan barang-barang atau perkhidmatan yang terbaik hanya penting menengah. Dalam jangka pendek, bahkan jika satu berasumsi bahwa barang-barang awam yang dapat dibezakan jelas dari barang-barang peribadi wujud, dan bahkan jika ia telah diberikan, itu yang diberikan baik awam mungkin berguna, barang-barang awam yang akan tetap bersaing dengan barang-barang peribadi. Dan hanya ada satu cara untuk mengetahui apakah atau tidak mereka lebih amat dikehendaki dan sejauh apa, atau *mutatis mutandis*, jika, dan sejauh apa, pengeluaran mereka akan mengambil tempat mengorbankan nonproduction atau dikurangi pengeluaran lebih diperlukan segera barang-barang peribadi: memiliki segala sesuatu yang disediakan oleh bebas bersaing perusahaan swasta. Oleh itu, bertentangan dengan kesimpulan tiba di oleh orang awam barang-barang teori, logik angkatan satu untuk menerima keputusan yang hanya murni pasaran sistem boleh melindungi rasional, dari sudut pandang konsumen, keputusan untuk menghasilkan awam yang baik. Dan hanya di bawah tulen kapitalis perintah ia boleh dipastikan itu keputusan tentang berapa banyak yang orang ramai yang baik untuk menghasilkan (dengan syarat ia harus dihasilkan pada semua) akan menjadi rasional juga.[^17] Tidak kurang dari semantik revolusi benar-benar Orwellian dimensi yang akan diperlukan untuk datang dengan hasil yang berbeda. Only if one were willing to interpret someone’s ”no” as really meaning “yes,” the “nonbuying of something” as meaning that it is really “preferred over that which the nonbuying person does instead of nonbuying,” of “force” really meaning “freedom,” of “noncontracting” really meaning “making a contract” and so on, could the public goods theorists’ point be “proven.”[^18] But how then could we be sure that they really mean what they seem to mean when they say what they say, and do not rather mean the exact opposite, or do not mean anything with a definite content at all, but are simply babbling? We could not. Murray N. Rothbard itu benar-benar tepat ketika dia komen pada usaha awam barang-barang ideologi untuk membuktikan keberadaan dipanggil kegagalan pasaran disebabkan oleh nonproduction atau kuantitatif atau secara kualitatif "kekurangan" pengeluaran barang-barang awam. He writes,

> [s]uch a view completely economic science asserts that free-market action is *ever* optimal. Ia adalah maklumat, bukan dari sudut pandang peribadi etika pandangan seorang ahli ekonomi, tetapi dari sudut pandang percuma, sukarela tindakan semua peserta dan memuaskan bebas dinyatakan keperluan pengguna. Government interference, therefore, will necessarily and always move *away* from such an optimum.[^19]

Sesungguhnya, argumen yang kononnya membuktikan kegagalan pasaran bukan apa-apa pendek terang tidak masuk akal. Dilucutkan dari mereka menyamar teknikal jargon semua yang mereka membuktikan adalah ini: pasaran tidak sempurna, seperti yang ia mempunyai ciri-ciri nonaggression prinsip dikenakan pada keadaan yang ditandai dengan kekurangan, dan jadi barang-barang tertentu atau perkhidmatan yang hanya boleh dihasilkan dan disediakan jika pencerobohan dibenarkan tidak akan dihasilkan. True enough, but no market theorist would ever dare deny this. Yet, and this is decisive, this “imperfection” of the market can be defended, morally as well as economically, whereas the supposed “perfections” of markets propagated by the public goods theorists cannot.[^20] Hal ini juga benar bahwa satu pemberhentian negeri ini semasa berlatih menyediakan barang-barang awam akan membayangkan beberapa perubahan dalam sedia ada struktur sosial dan distribusi kekayaan. Such a reshuffling would certainly imply hardship for some people. Sebagai soal fakta, ini adalah persis mengapa ada yang meluas awam rintangan untuk dasar menswastakan fungsi negeri, walaupun dalam jangka panjang secara keseluruhan kekayaan sosial akan ditingkatkan dengan ini sangat dasar. Surely, however, this fact cannot be accepted as a valid argument demonstrating the failure of markets. If a man has been allowed to hit other people on the head and is now not permitted to continue with this practice, he is certainly hurt. But one would hardly accept that as a valid excuse for upholding the old (hitting) rules. Dia adalah menyakiti, tetapi merosakkan dia bermaksud menggantikan perintah sosial di mana setiap pengguna mempunyai hak yang sama untuk menentukan apa dan berapa banyak dari apa-apa yang dihasilkan, untuk sistem di mana beberapa pengguna mempunyai hak untuk menentukan pada apa yang hal lain pengguna tidak dibenarkan untuk membeli secara sukarela apa yang mereka inginkan dengan cara yang adil diperoleh oleh mereka dan pada mereka. Certainly, such a substitution would be preferable from the point of view of all consumers as voluntary consumers.

By force of logical reasoning, one must accept Molinari’s conclusion that for the sake of consumers, all goods and services be provided by markets.[^21] Ia tidak hanya palsu yang jelas dibezakan kategori barang-barang wujud, yang akan menyebabkan khas perubahan umum tesis kapitalisme ekonomi keunggulan perlu; bahkan jika mereka tidak ada, tidak ada yang istimewa sebab boleh didapati mengapa ini seharusnya khas barang-barang awam tidak juga boleh dihasilkan oleh perusahaan swasta, sejak mereka selalu berdiri di pertandingan dengan barang-barang peribadi. Sebenarnya, walaupun semua itu propaganda dari barang-barang awam teori, efisiensi yang lebih besar pasaran berbanding dengan keadaan semakin menyedari berkenaan dengan lebih dan lebih dari yang dikatakan orang awam barang-barang. Setiap hari berhadapan dengan pengalaman, tidak sesiapa serius belajar hal ini dapat menyangkal bahwa pada masa kini pasaran bisa menghasilkan perkhidmatan pos, kereta api, telefon, elektrik, pendidikan, uang, jalan-jalan dan sebagainya lebih berkesan dari negeri ini, iaitu, yang lebih suka pengguna. Yet people generally shy away from accepting in one particular sector what logic forces upon them: in the production of security. Oleh karena itu, untuk seluruh bab ini aku akan mengalihkan perhatian untuk menjelaskan unggul fungsi seorang kapitalis ekonomi dalam bidang tertentu—yang keunggulan yang logis hal yang telah dibuat oleh sekarang, tetapi yang akan diberikan lebih meyakinkan sekali beberapa empiris bahan ditambah untuk analisis dan ia belajar sebagai masalah dalam dirinya sendiri.[^22]

How would a system of nonmonopolistic, competing producers of security work? Ia harus menjadi jelas dari awal lagi yang dalam menjawab pertanyaan ini satu meninggalkan alam semata-mata logik analisis dan itu jawaban yang mesti mempunyai kepastian, watak apodictic pengumuman mengenai kesahihan teori barangan awam. Masalah yang dihadapi adalah tepat mirip dengan yang bertanya bagaimana pasaran akan menyelesaikan masalah hamburger pengeluaran, terutamanya jika sehingga hamburger titik ini telah dihasilkan secara eksklusif oleh negara dan oleh itu tiada siapa yang dapat menarik pengalaman masa lalu. Only tentative answers could be formulated. Tiada siapa yang mungkin tahu struktur sebenar industri hamburger-berapa banyak syarikat yang bersaing akan muncul, apa pentingnya ini industri mungkin telah dibandingkan dengan yang lain, apa yang burger akan kelihatan seperti, berapa banyak jenis yang berbeza burger akan muncul di pasaran dan mungkin hilang lagi kerana kekurangan permintaan, dan sebagainya. No one could know all of the circumstances and the changes that would influence the very structure of the hamburger industry—changes in the demands of various consumer groups, changes in technology, changes in the prices of various goods that affect the industry directly or indirectly, and so on. It must be stressed that although similar issues arise concerning the private production of security, this by no means implies that nothing definitive can be said. Assuming certain general conditions of demand for security services (conditions that more or less realistically reflect the world as it presently is) what can and will be said is how different social orders of security production, characterized by different structural constraints under which they have to operate, will respond differently.[^23] Let me first analyze the specifics of monopolistic, state-run security production, for at least in this case one can draw on ample evidence regarding the validity of the conclusions reached and then compare this system with what could be expected if it were replaced by a nonmonopolistic one.

Even if security is considered to be a public good, in the allocation of scarce resources it must compete with other goods. What is spent on security can no longer be spent on other goods that also might increase consumer satisfaction. Moreover, security is not a single, homogeneous good, but rather consists of numerous components and aspects. There is not only prevention of crime, detection of criminals, and enforcement of the law, but there is also security from robbers, rapists, polluters, natural disasters, and so on. Moreover, security is not produced in a “lump,” but can be supplied in marginal units. In addition, different people attach different importance to security as a whole, and also to different aspects of the whole thing, depending on their personal characteristics, their past experiences with various factors of insecurity, and the time and place in which they happen to live.[^24] Here I address the fundamental economic problem of allocating scarce resources to competing uses, how can the state—an organization not financed exclusively by voluntary contributions and the sales of its products but rather partially or even wholly by taxes—decide how much security to produce, how much of each of its countless aspects, to whom and where to provide how much of what? The answer is that it has no rational way to decide this question. From the point of view of the consumers, its response to their security demands must be considered arbitrary. Do we need one policeman and one judge, or 100,000 of each? Should they be paid $100 a month or $10,000? Should the policemen, however many we might have, spend more time patrolling the streets, chasing robbers, and recovering stolen loot, or spying on participants in victimless crimes such as prostitution, drug use, or smuggling? And should the judges spend more time and energy hearing divorce cases, traffic violations, cases of shoplifting, and murder, or antitrust cases? Clearly, all of these questions must be answered somehow because as long as there is scarcity and we do not live in the Garden of Eden, the time and money spent on one thing cannot be spent on another. The state must answer these questions, too, but whatever it does, it does it without being subject to the profit-and-loss criterion. Hence, its action is arbitrary and necessarily involves countless wasteful misallocations from the consumer’s viewpoint.[^25] Independent to a large degree of consumer wants, the state-employed security producers instead do what they like. They hang around instead of doing anything, and if they do work they prefer doing what is easiest or work where they can wield power rather than serving consumers. Police officers drive around a lot, hassle petty traffic violators, spend huge amounts of money investigating victimless crimes that many people (i.e., nonparticipants) do not like but that few would be willing to spend their money on to fight, as they are not immediately affected by them. Yet with respect to what consumers want most urgently—the prevention of hardcore crime (i.e., crimes with victims), the apprehension and effective punishment of hard-core criminals, the recovery of loot, and the securement of compensation of victims of crimes from the aggressors—the police are notoriously inefficient, in spite of ever higher budget allocations.

Furthermore, whatever state-employed police or judges happen to do (arbitrary as it must be), they will tend to do poorly because their income is more or less independent of the consumer’s evaluations of their services. Thus one observes police arbitrariness and brutality and the slowness in the judicial process. Moreover, it is remarkable that neither the police nor the judicial system offers consumers anything even faintly resembling a service contract in which it is laid down in unambiguous terms what procedure the consumer can expect to be set in motion in a specific situation. Rather, both operate in a contractual void that over time allows them to change their rules of procedure arbitrarily and that explains the truly ridiculous fact that the settlement of disputes between police and judges on the one hand and private citizens on the other is not assigned to an independent third party, but to another policeman or judge who shares employers with one party—the government—in the dispute.

[^16]: See on this argument Rothbard, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” p. 533\. Incidentally, the existence of one single anarchist also invalidates all references to Pareto optimality as a criterion for economically legitimate state action.

[^17]: Essentially the same reasoning that leads one to reject the socialist-statist theory built on the allegedly unique character of public goods as defined by the criterion of nonexcludability, also applies when, instead, such goods are defined by means of the criterion of nonrivalrous consumption (see notes 6 and 12 above). For one thing, in order to derive the normative statement that they *should* be so offered from the statement of fact that goods that allow nonrivalrous consumption *would not* be offered on the free market to as many consumers as could be, this theory would face exactly the same problem of requiring a justifiable ethics. Moreover, the utilitarian reasoning is blatantly wrong, too. To reason, as the public goods theorists do, that the free-market practice of excluding free riders from the enjoyment of goods that would permit nonrivalrous consumption at zero marginal costs would indicate a suboptimal level of social welfare and hence would require compensatory state action is faulty on two related counts. First, cost is a subjective category and can never be objectively measured by any outside observer. Hence, to say that additional free riders could be admitted at no cost is totally inadmissible. In fact, if the subjective costs of admitting more consumers at no charge were indeed zero, the private owner-producer of the good in question would do so. If he does not do so, this reveals that the costs for him are *not* zero. The reason may be his belief that to do so would reduce the satisfaction available to the other consumers and so would tend to depress the price for his product; or it may simply be his dislike for uninvited free riders as, for instance, when I object to the proposal that I turn over my less-thancapacity-filled living room to various self-inviting guests for nonrivalrous consumption. In any case, since for whatever reason the cost cannot be assumed to be zero, it is then fallacious to speak of a market failure when certain goods are not handed out free of charge. On the other hand, welfare losses would indeed become unavoidable if one accepted the public goods theorists’ recommendation of letting goods that allegedly allow for nonrivalrous consumption to be provided free of charge by the state. Besides the insurmountable task of determining what fulfills this criterion, the state, independent of voluntary consumer purchases as it is, would first off face the equally insoluble problem of rationally determining *how much* of the public good to provide. Clearly, since even public goods are not free goods but are subject to “crowding” at some level of use, there is no stopping point for the state, because at any level of supply there would still be users who would have to be excluded and who, with a larger supply, could enjoy a free ride. But even if this problem could be solved miraculously, in any case the (necessarily inflated) cost of production and operation of the public goods distributed free of charge for nonrivalrous consumption would have to be paid for by taxes. And this then, i.e., the fact that consumers would have been coerced into enjoying their free rides, again proves beyond any doubt that these public goods, too, are of inferior value from the point of view of consumers to the competing private goods that they now no longer can acquire.

[^18]: The most prominent modern champions of Orwellian double talk are Buchanan and Tullock (see their works cited in note 3 above). They claim that government is founded by a “constitutional contract” in which everyone “conceptually agrees” to submit to the coercive powers of government with the understanding that everyone else is subject to it too. Hence government is only *seemingly* coercive but *really* voluntary. There are several evident objections to this curious argument. First, there is no empirical evidence whatsoever for the contention that any constitution has ever been voluntarily accepted by everyone concerned. Worse, the very idea of all people voluntarily coercing themselves is simply inconceivable, much in the same way as it is inconceivable to deny the law of contradiction. For if the voluntarily accepted coercion is voluntary, then it would have to be possible to revoke one’s subjection to the constitution, and the state would be no more than a voluntarily joined club. If, however, one does not have the “right to ignore the state”—and that one does not have this right is, of course, the characteristic mark of a state as compared to a club—then it would be logically inadmissible to claim that one’s acceptance of state coercion is voluntary. Furthermore, even if all this were possible, the constitutional contact could still not claim to bind anyone except the original signers of the constitution.

How can Buchanan and Tullock come up with such absurd ideas? By a semantic trick. What was “inconceivable” and “no agreement” in pre-Orwellian talk is for them “conceptually possible” and a “conceptual agreement.” For a most instructive short exercise in this sort of reasoning in leaps and bounds, see James Buchanan, “A Contractarian Perspective on Anarchy,” in idem, *Freedom in Constitutional Contract* (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1977). Here we learn (p. l7) that even the acceptance of the 55 mph speed limit is possibly voluntary (Buchanan is not quite sure) since it ultimately rests on all of us conceptually agreeing on the constitution, and that Buchanan is not really a statist, but in truth an anarchist (p. 11).

[^19]: Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, p. 887.

[^20]: This, first of all, should be kept in mind whenever one has to assess the validity of statist-interventionist arguments such as the following, by John Maynard Keynes (“The End of Laissez Faire,” in idem, *Collected Writings*, London: Macmillan, 1972, vol. IX, p. 291):

> The most important Agenda of the state relates not to those activities which private individuals are already fulfilling but to those functions which fall outside the sphere of the individual, to those decisions which are made by no one if the state does not make them. The important thing for government is not to do things which individuals are doing already and to do them a little better or a little worse: but to do those things which are not done at all.

This reasoning not only *appears* phony, it truly is.

[^21]: Some libertarian minarchists object that the existence of a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of a common body of law, and hence a government as a monopolistic judge and enforcement agency. (See, for example, John Hospers, *Libertarianism* [Los Angeles: Nash, 1971]; Tibor Machan, *Human Rights and Human Liberties* [Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1975].) Now it is certainly correct that a market presupposes the recognition and enforcement of those rules that underlie its operation. But from this it does not follow that this task must be entrusted to a monopolistic agency. In fact, a common language or sign-system is also presupposed by the market; but one would hardly think it convincing to conclude that hence the government must ensure the observance of the rules of language. Like the system of language, then, the rules of market behavior emerge spontaneously and can be enforced by the “invisible hand” of self-interest. Without the observance of common rules of speech, people could not reap the advantages that communication offers, and without the observance of common rules of conduct, people could not enjoy the benefits of the higher productivity of an exchange economy based on the division of labor. In addition, as I indicated above, independent of any government the nonaggression principle underlying the operation of markets can be defended a priori as just. Moreover, as I will argue in the conclusion of this chapter, it is precisely a competitive system of law-administration and law-enforcement that generates the greatest possible pressure to elaborate and enact rules of conduct that incorporate the highest degree of *consensus* conceivable. And of course the very rules that do just this are those that a priori reasoning establishes as the logically necessary presupposition of argumentation and argumentative agreement.

[^22]: Incidentally, the same logic that would force one to accept the idea of the production of security by private business as economically the best solution to the problem of consumer satisfaction also forces one, so far as moral-ideological positions are concerned, to abandon the political theory of classical liberalism and take the small but nevertheless decisive step (from there) to the theory of libertarianism, or private property anarchism. Classical liberalism, with Ludwig von Mises as its foremost representative in the twentieth century, advocates a social system based on the nonaggression principle. And this is also what libertarianism advocates. But classical liberalism then wants to have this principle enforced by a monopolistic agency (the government, the state)—an organization, that is, which is not exclusively dependent on voluntary, contractual support by the consumers of its respective services, but instead has the right to unilaterally determine its own income, i.e., the taxes to be imposed on consumers in order to do its job in the area of security production. Now, however plausible this might sound, it should be clear that it is inconsistent. Either the principle of nonaggression is valid, in which case the state as a privileged monopolist is immoral, or business built on and around aggression—the use of force and of noncontractual means of acquiring resources—is valid, in which case one must toss out the first theory. It is impossible to sustain both contentions and not to be inconsistent unless, of course, one could provide a principle that is more fundamental than both the nonaggression principle and the states’ right to aggressive violence and from which both, with the respective limitations regarding the domains in which they are valid, can be logically derived. However, liberalism never provided any such principle, nor will it ever be able to do so, since, to argue in favor of anything presupposes one’s right to be free of aggression. Given the fact then that the principle of nonaggression cannot be argumentatively contested as morally valid without implicitly acknowledging its validity, by force of logic one is committed to abandoning liberalism and accepting instead its more radical child: libertarianism, the philosophy of pure capitalism, which demands that the production of security be undertaken by private business too.

[^23]: On the problem of competitive security production, see Gustave de Molinari, *Production of Security*; Murray N. Rothbard, *Power and Market* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1977), chap. 1; idem, *For A New Liberty* (New York: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 12; W.C. Woolridge, *Uncle Sam the Monopoly Man* (New Rochelle, N.Y.: Arlington House, 1970), chaps. 5–6; Morris and Linda Tannehill, *The Market for Liberty* (New York: Laissez Faire Books, 1984), part 2.

[^24]: See Manfred Murck, *Soziologie der Öffentlichen Sicherheit* (Frankfurt: Campus, 1980).

[^25]: To say that the process of resource allocation becomes arbitrary in the absence of the effective functioning of the profit-loss criterion does not mean that the decisions that somehow have to he made are not subject to any kind of constraint and hence are pure whim. They are not, and any such decisions face certain constraints imposed on the decision maker. If, for instance, the allocation of production factors is decided democratically, then it evidently must appeal to the majority. But if a decision is constrained in this way or if it is made in any other way, it is still arbitrary from the point of view of voluntarily buying or not-buying consumers.

Regarding *democratically* controlled allocations, various deficiencies have become quite evident. As, for example, James Buchanan and Richard E. Wagner write (*The Consequences of Mr. Keynes* [London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1978], p. 19):

> Market competition is continuous; at each purchase, a buyer is able to select among competing sellers. Political competition is intermittent; a decision is binding generally for a fixed number of years. Market competition allows several competitors to survive simultaneously…. Political competition leads to an all-or-nothing outcome…. In market competition the buyer can be reasonably certain as to just what it is that he will receive from his purchase. In political competition, the buyer is in effect purchasing the services of an agent, whom he cannot bind…. Moreover, because a politician needs to secure the cooperation of a majority of politicians, the meaning of a vote for a politician is less clean than that of a “vote” for a private firm.

See also James M. Buchanan, “Individual Choice in Voting and the Market,” in idem, *Fiscal Theory and Political Economy* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1962); for a more general treatment of the problem Buchanan and Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent.*

What has commonly been overlooked, though—especially by those who try to make a virtue of the fact that a democracy gives equal voting power to everyone, whereas consumer sovereignty allows for unequal “votes”—is the most important deficiency of all: Under a system of consumer sovereignty people might cast unequal votes but, in any case, they exercise control exclusively over things that they acquired through original appropriation or contract and hence are forced to act morally. Under a democracy of production everyone is assumed to have something to say regarding things one did not so acquire; hence, one is permanently invited thereby not only to create legal instability with all its negative effects on the process of capital formation, but, moreover to act immorally. See on this also Ludwig von Mises, *Socialism* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1981), chap. 31.