## 公共产品理论和安全生产的谬误

1849年，古典自由主义占主流意识形态时，大家普遍认为“经济学家”和“社会主义”是反义词，比利时著名经济学家莫利纳里写道，

> 如果说在政治经济学中有一个公认的真理，那就是：任何情况下，消费者利益最大化的条件是劳动力和交易自由，商品总量才能满足消费者有行或无形的需求量，因为劳动力和交易自由是降价降到最低的充分必要条件。 并且，任何商品的消费者利益始终大于生产者利益。 如今，遵循这些原则，得出了一个严谨的结论：消费者对无形商品利益的追求，使安全生产应遵循完全竞争法则。 Whence it follows: That no government should have the right to prevent another government from going into competition with it, or require consumers of security to come exclusively to it for this commodity.[^1]

他对这场争论是这样评论的：要么这个即合乎逻辑又真实，要么经济学所依据的原则不成立。[^2]

对于这个令人不快的（对于所有的社会主义者）结论，显然只有一条出路：由于一些特殊原因，一些特定的商品不适用上述经济推理。 这就是所谓的公共产品理论者下定决心要证明的。[^3] 然而，我将证明事实上特殊商品或特殊原因并不存在，特别是安全生产不会构成任何问题，它与其他服务或商品生产没有任何差异，不管是房屋，奶酪还是保险。 尽管它有很多追随者，但整个公共产品理论都是错误的，华而不实的推理，充斥着内部矛盾，不当的结论，吸引着捉弄着大众的偏见和假设的信仰，但没有任何科学价值。[^4]

那么，为了避免绘制莫里纳利的结论，社会主义经济学家所找到的退路看起来会是什么样的呢？ 自莫里纳利时代以来，对是否存在适用于各种不同的经济分析的商品这一问题，大家通常地回答是肯定的。 事实上，所有现代经济学教科书均强调私人商品与公共物品之间区别的重要性，因为大家普遍承认生产私人商品的资本主义秩序的经济优越性的真理，而普遍否认公共商品的。[^5] 据说一些商品或服务（包括安全）很特殊，因为对它们的享有并不能仅限于那些为其生产确实提供过资金的人。 相反，那些没有提供资金的人也从中受益。 这样的商品被称为公共产品或公共服务（这与私人商品或私人服务相反，这些商品只对那些真正为此付费的人有利）。 由于公共物品这一特殊属性，人们认为市场无法生产，至少没有足够多的数量和足够好的质量的公共物品。因此，需要政府采取补偿性的行为。[^6]

不同作者所列举所谓的公共物品千差万别。 作者经常对相同的商品或服务分为不同的类别，这使得对一个不可争辩的特殊商品几乎没有分类，这显然预示着所有特质的模糊性质。[^7] 尽管如此, 作为公共物品中特别受欢迎的例子是消防队，他们以免邻居的房子着火，纵然他没有花钱，他仍然从我的消防队中获利；或是警察，尽管邻居没有出资请巡逻队，警察在我家房子周围走动，也吓跑了领居家潜在的窃贼；又或是灯塔，这是经济学家特别珍贵的例子，[^8]灯塔有助于船舶找到路，尽管船舶的主人没有为它的建造或保养贡献一分钱。

在继续对公共物品理论进行介绍和关键性检验之前，我将研究区别私人物品与公共物品是多么有用，这能有助于决定什么应该由私人生产，什么应该由国家提供或应该得到政府的帮助。 即使是最肤浅的分析也会指出，使用所谓的非排他性的标准会使人陷入深深的麻烦，而不是提出一个明智的解决方案。 反正乍一看似乎有一些政府提供的产品或服务作为公共物品确实达标，但有多少由政府生产的商品和服务能够列入公共物品的行列，确实不清楚。 铁路、邮政服务、电话、街道等诸如此类的都是商品，对它们的使用可以仅限于对它们出资的人，因此它们似乎是私人商品。 就多维度商品“安全”的多方面而言，情况似乎也都是一样的：取出保险金的一切原因，都必须符合私人商品的标准。 但这还不够。 正如许多政府提供的商品看起来是私人商品一样，许多私人生产的商品似乎也符合公共物品这一范畴。 显然，我的邻居可以从我悉心照料的玫瑰花园中获利，他们可以在不帮我打理花园的情况下，享受花园景观。 对于各种各样的改进也是如此，我在我的房产上赚钱获利，也能提高领居房产的价值。 即使那些不把钱投到他人帽子里的人，也能从街头音乐家的表演中获利。 公共汽车上那些没有帮我花钱买除臭剂的乘客，也从我的除臭剂中获利。 每一个遇到我的人都会从我的努力中获益，没有他们的经济支持，我把自己变成了最可爱的人。 如今，所有这些商品—玫瑰花园、物业改善、街头音乐、除臭剂、个人发展—因为他们显然具有公共物品的特征，因此它们就必须由政府提供或政府援助吗？

As these examples of privately produced public goods indicate, there is something seriously wrong with the thesis of public goods theorists that public goods cannot be produced privately, but instead require state intervention. Clearly they can be provided by markets. Furthermore, historical evidence shows us that all of the so-called public goods that states now provide have at some time in the past actually been provided by private entrepreneurs or even today are so provided in one country or another. For example, the postal service was once private almost everywhere; streets were privately financed and still are sometimes; even the beloved lighthouses were originally the result of private enterprise;[^9] private police forces, detectives, and arbitrators exist; and help for the sick, the poor, the elderly, orphans, and widows has been a traditional concern of private charity organizations. To say, then, that such things cannot be produced by a pure market system is falsified by experience a hundredfold.

Apart from this, other difficulties arise when the public-private goods distinction is used to decide what and what not to leave to the market. For instance, what if the production of so-called public goods did not have positive but had negative consequences for other people, or if the consequences were positive for some and negative for others? What if the neighbor whose house was saved from burning by my fire brigade had wished (perhaps because he was overinsured) that it had burned down; or my neighbors hate roses, or my fellow passengers find the scent of my deodorant disgusting? In addition, changes in the technology can change the character of a given good. For example, with the development of cable TV a good that was formerly (seemingly) public has become private. And changes in the laws of property—of the appropriation of property—can have the very same effect of changing the public-private character of a good. The lighthouse, for instance, is a public good only insofar as the sea is publicly (not privately) owned. But if it were permitted to acquire pieces of the ocean as private property, as it would be in a purely capitalist social order, then as the lighthouse shines over only a limited territory, it would clearly become possible to exclude nonpayers from the enjoyment of its services.

Leaving this somewhat sketchy level of discussion and looking into the distinction between private and public goods more thoroughly, we discover that the distinction turns out to be completely illusory. A clear-cut dichotomy between private and public goods does not exist, and this is essentially why there can be so many disagreements on how to classify a given good. All goods are more or less private or public and can—and constantly do—change with respect to their degree of privateness/publicness as people’s values and evaluations change, and as changes occur in the composition of the population. In order to recognize that they never fall, once and for all, into either one or the other category, one must only recall what makes something a good. For something to be a good it must be recognized and treated as scarce by someone. Something is not a good as such, that is to say; goods are goods only in the eyes of the beholder. Nothing is a good unless at least one person subjectively evaluates it as such. But then, when goods are never goods-as-such—when no physico-chemical analysis can identify something as an economic good—there is clearly no fixed, objective criterion for classifying goods as either private or public. They can never be private or public goods as such. Their private or public character depends on how few or how many people consider them to be goods, with the degree to which they are private or public changing as these evaluations change and range from one to infinity. Even seemingly completely private things like the interior of my apartment or the color of my underwear can thus become public goods as soon as somebody else starts caring about them.[^10] And seemingly public goods, like the exterior of my house or the color of my overalls, can become extremely private goods as soon as other people stop caring about them. Moreover, every good can change its characteristics again and again; it can even turn from a public or private good to a public or private bad or evil and vice versa, depending solely on the changes in this caring or uncaring. If this is so, then no decision whatsoever can be based on the classification of goods as private or public.[^11] In fact, to do so it would become necessary to ask virtually every individual with respect to every single good whether or not he happened to care about it—positively or negatively and perhaps to what extent—in order to determine who might profit from what and who should therefore participate in the good’s financing. (And how could one know if they were telling the truth?) It would also become necessary to monitor all changes in such evaluations continuously, with the result that no definite decision could ever be made regarding the production of anything, and as a consequence of a nonsensical theory all of us would be long dead.[^12]

But even if one were to ignore all these difficulties and were willing to admit, for the sake of argument that the private-public good distinction does hold water, the argument would not prove what it is supposed to. It neither provides conclusive reasons why public goods—assuming that they exist as a separate category of goods—should be produced at all, nor why the state rather than private enterprises should produce them. This is what the theory of public goods essentially says, having introduced the aforementioned conceptual distinction: The positive effects of public goods for people who do not contribute anything to their production or financing proves that these goods are desirable. But evidently they would not be produced, or at least not in sufficient quantity and quality, in a free, competitive market, since not all of those who would profit from their production would also contribute financially to make the production possible. In order to produce these goods (which are evidently desirable, but would not be produced otherwise), the state must jump in and assist in their production. This sort of reasoning, which can be found in almost every textbook on economics (Nobel laureates not excluded)[^13] is completely fallacious on two counts.

For one thing, to come to the conclusion that the state has to provide public goods that otherwise would not be produced, one must smuggle a norm into one’s chain of reasoning. Otherwise, from the statement that because of some special characteristics they have, certain goods would not be produced, one could never reach the conclusion that these goods *should* be produced. But with a norm required to justify their conclusion, the public goods theorists clearly have left the bounds of economics as a positive, *wertfrei* science. Instead they have moved into the realm of morals or ethics, and hence one would expect to be offered a theory of ethics as a cognitive discipline in order for them to do legitimately what they are doing and to justifiably derive their conclusion. But it can hardly be stressed enough that nowhere in public goods theory literature can anything that even faintly resembles such a cognitive theory of ethics be found.[^14] Thus it must be stated at the outset, that public goods theorists are misusing whatever prestige they might have as positive economists for pronouncements on matters on which, as their own writings indicate, they have no authority whatsoever. Perhaps, though, they have stumbled on something correct by accident, without having supported it with an elaborate moral theory? It becomes apparent that nothing could be further from the truth as soon as one explicitly formulates the norm that would be needed to arrive at the conclusion that the state has to assist in the provision of public goods. The norm required to reach the above conclusion is this: whenever one can somehow prove that the production of a particular good or service has a positive effect on someone else but would not be produced at all or would not be produced in a definite quantity or quality unless certain people participated in its financing, then the use of aggressive violence against these persons is allowed, either directly or indirectly with the help of the state, and these persons may be forced to share in the necessary financial burden. It does not need much comment to show that chaos would result from implementing this rule, as it amounts to saying that anyone can attack anyone else whenever he feels like it. Moreover, as I have demonstrated in detail elsewhere[^15] this norm could never be justified as a fair norm. To argue so, in fact to argue at all, in favor of or against anything, be it a moral, nonmoral, empirical, or logico-analytical position, it must be presupposed that contrary to what the norm actually says, each individual’s integrity as a physically independent decision-making unit is assured. For only if everyone is free from physical aggression by everyone else could anything first be said and then agreement or disagreement on anything possibly be reached. The principle of nonaggression is thus the necessary precondition for argumentation and possible agreement and hence can be argumentatively defended as a just norm by means of a priori reasoning.

[^1]: Gustave de Molinari, *The Production of Security*, trans. J. Huston McCulloch (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 2, 1977), p. 3.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 4.

[^3]: For various approaches of public goods theorists, see James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962); James M. Buchanan, *The Public Finances* (Homewood, Ill.: Richard Irwin, 1970); idem, *The Limits of Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975); Gordon Tullock, *Private Wants, Public Means* (New York: Basic Books, 1970); Mancur Olson, *The Logic of Collective Action* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965); William J. Baumol, *Welfare Economics and the Theory of the State* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1952).

[^4]: See on the following, Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), pp. 883ff.; idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (1981); Walter Block, “Free Market Transportation: Denationalizing the Roads,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979); idem, “Public Goods and Externalities: The Case of Roads,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 7, no. 1 (1983).

[^5]: See for instance, William J. Baumol and Alan S. Blinder, *Economics, Principles and Policy* (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1979), chap. 31.

[^6]: Another frequently used criterion for public goods is that of “nonrivalrous consumption.” Generally, both criteria seem to coincide: When free riders cannot be excluded, nonrivalrous consumption is possible; and when they can be excluded, consumption becomes rivalrous, or so it seems. However, as public goods theorists argue, this coincidence is not perfect. It is, they say, conceivable that while the exclusion of free riders might be possible, their inclusion might not be connected with any additional cost (the marginal cost of admitting free riders is zero, that is), and that the consumption of the good in question by the additionally admitted free rider will not necessarily lead to a subtraction in the consumption of the good available to others. Such a good would be a public good, too. And since exclusion would be practiced on the free market and the good would not become available for nonrivalrous consumption to everyone it otherwise could—even though this would require no additional costs—this, according to statist-socialist logic, would prove a market failure, i.e., a suboptimal level of consumption. Hence the state would have to take over the provision of such goods. (A movie theater, for instance, might be only half full, so it might be “costless” to admit additional viewers free of charge, and their watching the movie also might not affect the paying viewers; hence the movie would qualify as a public good. Since, however, the owner of the theater would be engaging in exclusion, instead of letting free riders enjoy a “costless” performance, movie theaters would be ripe for nationalization.) On the numerous fallacies involved in defining public goods in terms of nonrivalrous consumption see notes 12 and 17 below.

[^7]: On this subject Walter Block, “Public Goods and Externalities.”

[^8]: See for instance Buchanan, *The Public Finances*, p. 23; Paul Samuelson, *Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), p. 166.

[^9]: See Ronald Coase, “The Lighthouse in Economics,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 17 (1974).

[^10]: See, for instance, the ironic case that Block makes for socks being public goods in “Public Goods and Externalities.”

[^11]: To avoid any misunderstanding here, every single producer and every association of producers making joint decisions can, at any time, decide whether or not to produce a good based on an evaluation of the privateness or publicness of the good. In fact, decisions on whether or not to produce public goods privately are constantly made within the framework of a market economy. What is impossible is to decide whether or not to ignore the outcome of the operation of a free market based on the assessment of the degree of privateness or publicness of a good.

[^12]: In fact, then, the introduction of the distinction between private and public goods is a relapse into the pre-subjectivist era of economics. From the point of view of subjectivist economics, no good exists that can be categorized objectively as private or public. This is essentially why the second proposed criterion for public goods—permitting nonrivalrous consumption (see note 6 above)—breaks down too. For how could any outside observer determine whether or not the admittance of an additional free rider at no charge would not indeed lead to a subtraction in the consumption of a good to others? Clearly there is no way that he could objectively do so. In fact, it might well be that one’s enjoyment of a movie or of driving on a road would be considerably reduced if more people were allowed in the theater or on the road. Again, to find out whether or not this is the case one would have to ask every individual—and not everyone might agree (what then?). Furthermore, since even a good that allows nonrivalrous consumption is not a free good, as a consequence of admitting additional free riders “crowding” would eventually occur, and hence everyone would have to be asked about the appropriate “margin.” In addition, my consumption may or may not be affected depending on who it is that is admitted free of charge, so I would have to be asked about this, too. And finally, everyone might change his opinion on all of these questions over time. It is thus in the same way impossible to decide whether or not a good is a candidate for state (rather than private) production based on the criterion of nonrivalrous consumption as on that of nonexcludability (see also note 17 below).

[^13]: See Paul Samuelson, “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” *Review of Economics and Statistics* (1954); idem, *Economics*, chap. 8; Milton Friedman, *Capitalism and Freedom* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), chap. 2; F.A. Hayek, *Law, Legislation and Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1979), vol. 3, chap. 14.

[^14]: Economists in recent years, particularly the Chicago School, have been increasingly concerned with the analysis of property rights. Harold Demsetz, “The Exchange and Enforcement of Property Rights,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 7 (1964); idem, “Toward a Theory of Property Rights,” *American Economic Review* (1967); Ronald Coase, “The Problem of Social Cost,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 3 (1960); Armen Alchian, *Economic Forces at Work* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1977), part 2; Richard Posner, *Economic Analysis of the Law* (Boston: Brown, 1977). Such analyses, however, have nothing to do with ethics. On the contrary, they represent attempts to substitute economic efficiency considerations for the establishment of justifiable ethical principles [on the critique of such endeavors see Murray N. Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982), chap. 26; Walter Block, “Coase and Demsetz on Private Property Rights,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977); Ronald Dworkin, “Is Wealth a Value,” *Journal of Legal Studies* 9 (1980); Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Efficiency,” in Mario Rizzo, ed., *Time Uncertainty and Disequilibrium* (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1979). Ultimately, all efficiency arguments are irrelevant because there simply exists no nonarbitrary way of measuring, weighing, and aggregating individual utilities or disutilities that result from some given allocation of property rights. Hence any attempt to recommend some particular system of assigning property rights in terms of its alleged maximization of “social welfare” is pseudo-scientific humbug. See in particular, Murray N. Rothbard, *Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 3, 1977); also Lionel Robbins, “Economics and Political Economy,” *American Economic Review* (1981).

The “Unanimity Principle” which Buchanan and Tullock, following Knut Wicksell (*Finanztheoretische Untersuchungen*, Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1896), have repeatedly proposed as a guide for economic policy is also not to be confused with an ethical principle proper. According to this principle only such policy changes should be enacted which can find unanimous consent—and that surely sounds attractive; but then, *mutatis mutandis*, it also determines that the status quo be preserved if there is less than unanimous agreement on any proposal of change—and that sounds far less attractive, because it implies that any given, present state of affairs regarding the allocation of property rights must be legitimate either as a point of departure or as a to-be-continued-state. However, the public choice theorists offer no justification in terms of a normative theory of property rights for this daring claim as would be required. Hence, the unanimity principle is ultimately without ethical foundation. In fact, because it would legitimize any conceivable status quo, the Buchananites’ most favored principle is no less than outrightly absurd as a moral criterion. See on this also Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty* chap. 26; idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” pp. 549f.

Whatever might still be left for the unanimity principle, Buchanan and Tullock, following the lead of Wicksell again, then give away by reducing it in effect to one of “relative” or “quasi” unanimity.

[^15]: Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “From the Economics of Laissez Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); infra chap. 8.