###

让我从Mises的解决方案开始。什么是典型经济命题的逻辑状态，例如边际效用定律（当供应的货物的单位被看成是另外一个更高单位的同等服务时，那么赋予这个单位的价值就必须下降，因为它只能被当作实现一个目标的手段，那么当前货物的价值就比原来一个单位该货物的价值更低了）或货币数量理论（当货币数量增加时，手头现金储备中的资金需求不变，金钱的购买力会下降）？

在拟定他的回答时, 米塞斯面临着双重挑战。一方面， 有现代经验主义提供的答案。Vienna Ludwig von Mises知道实际上是经验主义运动的早期的中心之一：这一运动即将成为西方世界的主流学术哲学，并在这一天塑造了绝大多数经济学家都有自己的纪律的形象。[^2]

[^2]：在维也纳学派中的Viktor Kraft, Der Wiener Kreis (维也纳: 斯普林格, 1968)；经济学的经验主义-实证主义的解释可参看Terrence W. Hutchison的代表作，经济学理论的意义和基本假设 (伦敦: 麦克米伦, 1938)。Hutchison是经验主义的流行派的追随者，自此，他对流行经济学的前景变得不那么热衷了，比如可看他的经济学中的知识和无知(芝加哥: 芝加哥大学出版社, 1977) —然而, 他仍然认为别无选择, 只能固守Popper的证伪主义。也可以参照Milton Friedman的这本书“实证经济学方法论”，正面经济学随笔（芝加哥: 芝加哥大学新闻, 1953）；Mark Blaug的经济学方法论 (剑桥: 剑桥大学出版社, 1980)；在维也纳举行的Mises研讨中有一个积极的参与者，Felix Kaufmann，社会科学方法论 (纽约: 人文科学出版社, 1958)；经验主义理论在经济学中的主导地位，是由于可能几乎没有一本教科书没有明确地将经济学归类为—或其他—经验 (后验) 科学。

经验主义认为自然和自然科学是它的模型。根据经验主义，刚才提到的经济命题的例子具有与自然定律相同的逻辑地位。与自然定律一样，它们陈述了两个或多个事件之间的假设关系，实质上是以if-then语句的形式。正如自然科学的假说一样，经济学的命题要求对经验进行不断的测试。一个关于经济事件之间关系的命题永远不能被证实。相反，它永远受制于偶然、未来经验的结果。这样的经验可能会证实这一假设。但这并不能证明这一假设是正确的，因为经济命题将在其对相关事件的描述中使用一般术语(普遍出现在哲学术语中)，从而适用于不确定数量的案例或实例，因此总是留给可能伪造未来经验的空间。所有这一切的确认将证明，这个假说还没有被证明是错误的。另一方面，经验可能会伪造假说。这肯定证明了假设的存在是错误的，但它并不能证明特定事件之间的假设关系是无法观测到的。它只能表明，在一个人的观察中，考虑和控制实际上才是至今已经被解释和控制的东西，但这种关系还没有显现出来。然而，不能排除，这种关系可能在一些其他情况被控制的时候显现。

这种哲学所激发的态度，确实已经成为大多数当代经济学家的特点，他们做生意的方式就是一种怀疑论，有这样一句座右铭“在经济现象的领域里，什么也不能确定是不可能的。” 更准确地说，由于经验主义认为经济现象是客观的数据，在空间中扩展，并以可量化的方式衡量—这与自然科学的现象有严格的类比—经验主义经济学家的特殊怀疑论可能被描述为一种不能保证任何事物的社会工程师。[^3]

[^3]：经验主义实证主义的相对论性后果参见Hans-Hermann Hoppe，社会主义与资本主义理论（波士顿: 克鲁沃学术出版社, 1989），第6章；同上，“社会主义的智力掩护，”自由市场（1988年二月）；也可参见下文第11章。

来自历史主义学派另一个挑战。在Mise在奥地利和瑞士生活期间，历史主义哲学是德国讲大学和他们的创立的普遍的思想体系。历史主义哲学是讲德语的大学的主流思想，也是德国建筑的主流思想。随着经验主义的高涨，它的声望已远不如从前。然而，在过去的十年里，历史主义在西方学术界重新获得了发展势头。今天，它在诠释学、修辞学、解构主义和认识论无政府主义的名称下无处不在。[^4]

[^4]：参见Ludwig von Mises，奥地利经济学派的历史背景（奥本，亚拉巴马州：路德维希•冯•米塞斯研究所，1984），第10章；Murray N. Rothbard，Ludwig von Mises：学者，创造者，英雄（奥本，亚拉巴马州： 路德维希•冯•米塞斯研究所，1988）；对历史主义思想的批判性调查可参见Karl R. Popper，历史决定论的贫困（伦敦：劳特利奇 &开根•宝罗出版社，1957）；对于历史主义经济学解释的旧版本的代表作可参见Werner Sombart，三个国家经济体（慕尼黑：Duncker & Humblot出版社，1930）；现代经济学，解释学的转折Donald McCloskey，经济学的言辞（麦迪逊：威斯康辛大学出版社，1985）；Ludwig Lachmann，“从Mises到Shackle：关于奥地利经济与万花筒社会的一篇文章，” 经济文献杂志14，no. 1 (1976)。

For historicism, and most conspicuously for its contemporary versions, the model is not nature but a literary text. According to the historicist doctrine, economic phenomena are not objective magnitudes that can be measured. Instead, they are subjective expressions and interpretations unfolding in history to be understood and interpreted by the economist just as a literary text unfolds before and is interpreted by its reader. As subjective creations, the sequence of their events follows no objective law. Nothing in the literary text and nothing in the sequence of historical expressions and interpretations is governed by constant relations. Of course, certain literary texts actually exist, and so do certain sequences of historical events. But this by no means implies that anything had to happen in the order it did. It simply occurred. In the same way as one can always invent different literary stories, history and the sequence of historical events might also have happened in an entirely different way. Moreover, according to historicism, and particularly visible in its modern hermeneutical version, the formation of these always contingently related human expressions and their interpretations are also not constrained by any objective law. In literary production anything can be expressed or interpreted in any way, and along the same line, historical and economic events are whatever someone expresses or interprets them to be, and their description by the historian and economist is then whatever he expresses or interprets these past subjective events to have been.

The attitude that historicist philosophy generates is one of relativism. Its motto is “everything is possible”. Unconstrained by any objective law, history, economics, and literary criticism are matters of esthetics for the historicist-hermeneutician. Accordingly, his output takes on the form of disquisitions on what someone feels about what he feels was felt by someone else. This is a literary form with which we are only too familiar, in particular in such fields as sociology and political science.[^5]

[^5]: On the extreme relativism of historicism-hermeneutics see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism”; Murray N. Rothbard, “The Hermeneutical Invasion of Philosophy and Economics”, *Review of Austrian Economics* 3 (1988); Henry Veatch, “Deconstruction in Philosophy: Has Rorty Made it the Denouement of Contemporary Analytical Philosophy”, *Review of Metaphysics* (1985); Steven Horwitz and Peter Boettke, “Misesian Integrity: A Comment on Barnes”, *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Fall, 1987); David Gordon, *Hermeneutics vs. Austrian Economics* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, Occasional Paper Series, 1987); for a brilliant critique of contemporary sociology see Stanislav Andreski, *Social Science as Sorcery* (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1973).

One senses intuitively that something is seriously amiss in both the empiricist as well as the historicist philosophies. Their epistemological accounts do not even seem to fit their own chosen models: nature on the one hand and literary texts on the other. In any case, with regard to economic propositions such as the law of marginal utility or the quantity theory of money, their accounts seem to be simply wrong. The law of marginal utility certainly does not strike one as a hypothetical law forever subject for its validation to confirming or disconfirming experiences popping up here or there. And to conceive of the phenomena referred to in the law as quantifiable magnitudes seems to be nothing short of ridiculous. Nor does the historicist interpretation seem to be any better. To think that the relationship between the events referred to in the quantity theory of money can be undone if one only wishes to do so seems absurd. The idea appears no less absurd that concepts such as money, demand for money, and purchasing power are formed without any objective constraints and refer merely to whimsical subjective creations. Instead, contrary to the empiricist doctrine, both examples of economic propositions appear to be logically true and to refer to events which are subjective in nature. Contrary to historicism, it would seem that what they state could not possibly be undone in all of history and contain conceptual distinctions which, while they refer to subjective events, are nonetheless objectively constrained and incorporate universally valid knowledge.

Like most of the better known economists before him, Mises shares these intuitions.[^6] Yet in his quest of the foundation of economics, Mises goes beyond intuition. He takes on the challenge posed by empiricism and historicism in order to reconstruct the basis on which these intuitions can be understood as correct and justified systematically. He does not want thereby to bring about a new discipline of economics, but in explaining what formerly had only been grasped intuitively, Mises goes far beyond what had ever been done before. In reconstructing the rational foundations of the economists’ intuitions, he assures us of the proper path for any future development in economics and safeguards us against systematic intellectual error.

[^6]: Regarding the epistemological views of such predecessors as Jean Baptiste Say, Nassau W. Senior, John E. Cairnes, John Stuart Mill, Carl Menger, and Friedrich Wieser, see Ludwig von Mises, *Epistemological Problems of Economics* (New York: New York University Press, 1981), pp. 17–23; also Murray N. Rothbard, “Praxeology: The Methodology of Austrian Economics”, in Edwin Dolan, ed., *The Foundations of Modern Austrian Economics* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1976); Hoppe, *Praxeology and Economic Science*.

Empiricism and historicism, Mises notes at the outset of his reconstruction, are self-contradictory doctrines.[^7] The empiricist notion that all events, natural or economic, are only hypothetically related is contradicted by the message of this very basic empiricist proposition itself, for if this proposition were regarded as itself being merely hypothetically true (i.e., a hypothetically true proposition regarding hypothetically true propositions), it would not even qualify as an epistemological pronouncement. It would provide no justification whatsoever for the claim that economic propositions are not and cannot be categorically, or a priori, true as our intuition informs us they are. If, however, the basic empiricist premise were assumed to be categorically true (i.e., if we assume that one could say something a priori true about the way events are related), then this would belie its very own thesis that empirical knowledge must invariably be hypothetical knowledge, thus making room for a discipline such as economics claiming to produce a priori valid empirical knowledge. Further, the empiricist thesis that economic phenomena must be conceived of as observable and measurable magnitudes—analogous to those of the natural sciences—is rendered inconclusive on its own account, for empiricism provides us with meaningful empirical knowledge when it informs us that our economic concepts are grounded in observations. However, the concepts of observation and measurement, which empiricism must employ in claiming what it does, are themselves obviously not derived from observational experience in the sense that concepts such as hens and eggs or apples and pears are. One cannot observe someone making an observation or measurement. Rather, one must first understand what observations and measurements are in order to be able to interpret certain observable phenomena as the making of an observation or the taking of a measurement. Thus, contrary to its own doctrine, empiricism is compelled to admit that there is empirical knowledge which is based on understanding—just as according to our intuitions economic propositions claim to be based on understanding rather than on observations.[^8]

[^7]: In addition to Mises’s works cited at the outset of this chapter and the literature mentioned in note 1, see Murray N. Rothbard, *Individualism and the Philosophy of the Social Sciences* (San Francisco: Cato Institute, 1979); for a splendid philosophical critique of empiricist economics see Martin Hollis and Edward Nell, *Rational Economic Man* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975); for particularly valuable defenses of rationalism against empiricism and relativism—without reference to economics—see Brand Blanshard, *Reason and Analysis* (La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1964); Friedrich Kambartel, *Erfahrung und Struktur. Bausteine zu einer Kritik des Empirismus und Formalismus* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968).

[^8]: For an elaborate defense of epistemological dualism see also K.O. Apel, *Transformation der Philosophie*, 2 vols. (Frankfurt/M: Suhrkamp, 1973); Jürgen Habermas, *Zur Logik der Sozialwissenschaften* (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1970).

Regarding historicism, its self-contradictions are no less manifest. If, as historicism claims, historical and economic events, which it conceives of as sequences of subjectively understood rather than observed events, are not governed by constant, time-invariant relations, then this very proposition also cannot claim to say anything constantly true about history and economics. Instead, it would be a proposition with a fleeting truth value: it may be true now, if we wish, yet possibly false in a moment, in case we do not, and no one would ever know whether we do or do not. However, if this were the status of the basic historicist premise, it too would obviously not qualify as epistemology. Historicism would not have given us any reason why we should believe any of it. If, however, the basic proposition of historicism were assumed to be invariantly true, then such a proposition about the constant nature of historical and economic phenomena would contradict its own doctrine denying any such constants. Furthermore, the historicist’s (and even more so its modern heir, the hermeneutician’s) claim that historical and economic events are mere subjective creations, unconstrained by any objective factors, is proven false by the very statement making it. Evidently, a historicist must assume this very statement to be meaningful and true; he must presume to say something specific about something, rather than merely to utter meaningless sounds such as abracadabra. However, if this is the case, clearly his statement must be assumed to be constrained by something outside the realm of arbitrary subjective creations. Of course, I can say what the historicist says in English, German, Chinese, or any other language I wish, and in so far historic and economic expressions and interpretations may well be regarded as mere subjective creations. But whatever I say in whatever language I choose must be assumed to be constrained by some underlying propositional meaning of my statement, which is the same for any language, and exists completely independent of whatever the peculiar linguistic form may be in which it is expressed. Contrary to historicist belief, the existence of such a constraint is not such that one could possibly dispose of it at will. Rather, it is objective in that we can understand it to be the logically necessary presupposition for saying anything meaningful at all, as opposed to merely producing meaningless sounds. The historicist could not claim to say anything if it were not for the fact that his expressions and interpretations are actually constrained by laws of logic as the very presupposition of meaningful statements as such.[^9]

[^9]: See on this in particular Hoppe, “In Defense of Extreme Rationalism”.

With such a refutation of empiricism and historicism, Mises notices, the claims of rationalist philosophy are successfully reestablished, and the case is made for the possibility of a priori true statements, as those of economics seem to be. Indeed, Mises explicitly regards his own epistemological investigations as the continuation of the work of western rationalist philosophy. With Leibniz and Kant he stands opposite the tradition of Locke and Hume.[^10] He takes Leibniz’s side when he answers Locke’s famous dictum “nothing is in the intellect that has not previously been in the senses” with his equally famous one “except the intellect itself”. And he recognizes his task as a philosopher of economics as strictly analogous to that of Kant’s as a philosopher of pure reason (i.e., of epistemology). Like Kant, Mises wants to demonstrate the existence of true a priori synthetic propositions, or propositions whose truth values can be definitely established, even though for such an undertaking the means of formal logic are insufficient and observations are unnecessary.

[^10]: See Ludwig von Mises, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1978), p. 12.

This criticism of empiricism and historicism has proved the general rationalist claim. It has proved that we indeed do possess knowledge which is not derived from observation yet is constrained by objective laws. In fact, our refutation of empiricism and historicism contains such a priori synthetic knowledge. Yet what about the constructive task of showing that the propositions of economics—such as the law of marginal utility and the quantity theory of money—qualify as this type of knowledge? In order to do so, Mises notices in accordance with the strictures traditionally formulated by rationalist philosophers, economic propositions must fulfill two requirements. First, it must be possible to demonstrate that they are not derived from observational evidence, for observational evidence can only reveal things as they happen to be: there is nothing in it that would indicate why things must be the way they are. Instead, economic propositions must be shown to be grounded in reflective cognition, in our understanding of ourselves as knowing subjects. Second, this reflective understanding must yield certain propositions as self-evident material axioms, not in the sense that such axioms would have to be self-evident in a psychological sense, that is, that one would have to be immediately aware of them or that their truth depends on a psychological feeling of conviction. On the contrary, like Kant before him, Mises stresses the fact that it is usually much more painstaking to discover such axioms than it is to discover some observational truth such as that the leaves of trees are green or that I am 6 foot 2 inches.[^11] Rather, what makes them self-evident material axioms is the fact that no one can deny their validity without self-contradiction, for in attempting to deny them one already presupposes their validity.

[^11]: See Immanuel Kant, *Kritik der reinin Vernunft*, in idem, *Werke*, 12 vols., ed. W. Weischedel (Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1968), vol. 3, p. 45; Ludwig von Mises, *Human Action: A Treatise on Economics* (Chicago: Regnery, l966), p. 38.

Mises points out that both requirements are fulfilled by what he terms the axiom of action (i.e., the proposition that humans act, that they display intentional behavior).[^12] Obviously, this axiom is not derived from observation—there are only bodily movements to be observed but no such thing as actions—but stems instead from reflective understanding. And this understanding concerns a self-evident proposition, for its truth cannot be denied, since the denial would itself have to be categorized as an action. But is this not just trivial? And what has economics got to do with this? Of course, it was previously recognized that economic concepts such as prices, costs, production, money, and credit had something to do with the fact that there were acting people. But that and how all of economics could be grounded in and reconstructed based on such a trivial proposition, is anything but clear. It is one of Mises’s greatest achievements to have shown precisely that there are insights implied in this psychologically speaking trivial axiom of action that were not themselves psychologically self-evident as well; and that it is these insights which provide the foundation for the theorems of economics as true a priori synthetic propositions.

[^12]: On the following see in particular Mises, *Human Action*, chap. IV; Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1962), chap. 1.

It is certainly not psychologically evident that with every action an actor pursues a goal, and that whatever the goal may be, the fact that it was pursued by an actor reveals that he must have placed a relatively higher value on it than on any other goal of action that he could have thought of at the start of his action. It is not evident that in order to achieve his most highly valued goal an actor must interfere or decide not to interfere (which is also an intentional interference) at an earlier point in time in order to produce a later result, nor is it obvious that such interferences invariably imply the employment of some scarce means—at least those of the actor’s body, its standing room, and the time absorbed by the action. It is not self-evident that these means must also have value for an actor—a value derived from that of the goal—because the actor must regard their employment as necessary in order to effectively achieve the goal; and that actions can only be performed sequentially and always involve the choice of taking up that one course of action which at some given time promises the most highly valued results to the actor and excluding at the same time the pursual of other, less highly valued goals. It is not automatically clear that as a consequence of having to choose and give preference to one goal over another—of not being able to realize all goals simultaneously—each and every action implies the incurrence of costs (forsaking the value attached to the most highly ranking alternative goal that cannot be realized or whose realization must be deferred) because the means necessary to attain it are bound up in the production of another, even more highly valued goal. Finally, it is not evident that at its starting point every goal of action must be considered worth more to the actor than its cost and capable of yielding a profit (a result whose value is ranked higher than that of the foregone opportunity), and that every action is also invariably threatened by the possibility of a loss if an actor finds in retrospect that contrary to his expectations the actually achieved result has a lower value than the relinquished alternative would have had.

All of these categories which we know to be the very heart of economics—values, ends, means, choice, preference, cost, profit and loss—are implied in the axiom of action. Like the axiom itself, they are not derived from observation. Rather, that one is able to interpret observations in terms of such categories requires that one already knows what it means to act. No one who is not an actor could ever understand them, as they are not “given”, ready to be observed, but observational experience is cast in these terms as it is construed by an actor. Further, while they and their interrelations are not obviously implied in the action axiom, once it has been made explicit that and how they are implied, one no longer has any difficulty recognizing them as being a priori true in the same sense as the axiom itself is. Any attempt to disprove the validity of what Mises has reconstructed as implied in the very concept of action would have to be aimed at a goal, requiring means, excluding other courses of action, incurring costs, subjecting the actor to the possibility of achieving or not achieving the desired goal, and leading to a profit or a loss. Thus, it is manifestly impossible to dispute or falsify the validity of Mises’s insights. In fact, a situation in which the categories of action would cease to have a real existence could itself never be observed or spoken of, as making an observation or speaking are also actions.

All true economic propositions, and this is what praxeology is all about and what Mises’s great insight consists of, can be deduced by means of formal logic from this incontestably true material knowledge regarding the meaning of action and its categories. More precisely, all true economic theorems consist of (a) an understanding of the meaning of action, (b) a situation or situational change—assumed to be given or identified as being given—and described in terms of action-categories, and (c) a logical deduction of the consequences—again in terms of such categories—which are to result for an actor from this situation or situational change. For instance, the law of marginal utility[^13] follows from our indisputable knowledge of the fact that every actor always prefers what satisfies him more over what satisfies him less, plus the assumption that he is faced with an increase in the supply of a good (a scarce mean) whose units he regards as of equal serviceability by one additional unit. From this it follows with logical necessity that this additional unit can only be employed as a means for the removal of an uneasiness that is deemed less urgent than the least valuable goal previously satisfied by a unit of such a good. Provided there is no flaw in the process of deduction, the conclusions which economic theorizing yields must be valid a priori. These propositions’ validity ultimately goes back to the indisputable axiom of action. To think, as empiricism does, that these propositions require continual empirical testing for their validation is absurd and a sign of outright intellectual confusion. And it is no less absurd and confused to believe, as does historicism, that economics has nothing to say about constant and invariable relations but merely deals with historically accidental events. To say so is to prove such a statement wrong, as saying anything meaningful at all already presupposes acting and a knowledge of the meaning of the categories of action.

[^13]: On the law of marginal utility see Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 119–27; Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 268–71.
