#### 资本主义过程

当凯恩斯关于资本主义过程的理论终于得到考虑时，这样的判决会发现更多的支持。 凯恩斯并不是资本主义的朋友，资本家应该从上述引文中显而易见。 实际上，通过主张“投资社会化”，他的社会主义立场公开出来了。[^67] 对凯恩斯来说，资本主义*意味着*危机。

他从本质上说明了两个原因，第一个是凯因斯认为资本主义进程的周期性，对此我们已经提过了。当然，只要经济的进程在很大程度上取决于资本家，正如我们所听到的那样，“他们基本上不知道他们所购买的是什麽东西”，他们密谋“保持稀缺”，它不可能是平坦丶平均的。许多人作决定主要是取以“胃口和天气”为基础的，所以资本主义过程必须是不稳定的。 企业家乐观主义和悲观主义的“消长”而转动，而它们又是由“商业界的无法控制和不听话的心理”所决定的，繁荣和萧条是不可避免的。 商业周期 - 就是凯恩斯《*通论*》第22章的核心信息，“贸易周期注释” - 是心理上确定的现象。 这肯定是不正确的。商业周期的心理学解释是绝对不可能的，并且将其视为是一种解释本身涉及到类别错误：商业周期显然是真实的事件，许多人经历过，但他们经历过的实在是在真实商品世界中发生的和有真正的财富。 另一方面，信仰丶情绪丶期望丶乐观和悲观主要是*心理*现象。人们可以将一种心理现象想象为影响或影响另一种心理现象，但是不可能将心理现象想象为对外部世界中的真实事物和物品产生直接影响的心理现象。 只有通过*行动*才能影响真实事件的进程; 对商业周期的任何解释都必然是一个*实践*（而不是心理学）。 事实上，凯恩斯的心理商业循环理论*无法解释真正发生的事情*。然而，真正使事物发生的人必须行动，并分配和重新分配稀缺资源的价值目标。然而，正如凯因斯所说的那样，一个人不能随心所欲地行事，因为行动总是受到真正的稀缺性的制约，这种稀缺性根本不可能受到我们的心理的影响。凯因斯也没有用他的理论解释为什么企业家情绪的波动会导致商业波动的任何特殊的模式，比如繁荣和萧条周期，他想解释，而不是其他任何可以想象的波动模式。

对于资本主义的不稳定的原因，与社会主义方案的可取性，根据凯因斯的说法，是资本主义固有的停滞倾向。他的停滞论是他从Hobson and Mummery取来并认可的概念，“在现代工业社会的正常状态，消费限制生产和不生产消费。”[^68] 这是他当为是至理名言之一的废话。

停滞是由于缺乏消费。 他写道：“直到充分就业持续的时候，资本的增长并不依赖于低消费倾向，但恰恰相反，它将受其阻碍。”[^69] 结合这种消费不足论点是一种“基本的心理规律，我们信念是依靠我们对人性的知识和经验的详细事实，作为一项规则， 平均而言，人们的消费会随着他们收入的增加而有所增加，但不会增加超过他们收入的加幅。”[^70] “通常......随着实际收入的增加，收入增幅的大部分将会被储蓄起来。＂[^71]

就其本身而言，这第二条法则在争论中被接受为合情合理（除了说消费当然不会降至零），似乎并不有任何麻烦。 这又怎样呢？ 如果储蓄超过比例地随着收入增幅而增加，那么社会产品就会越好。[^72] But Keynes, in his characteristic logic-carefree way of thinking joins this law to the thesis that production is limited by consumption, and he has then no difficulty proving whatever he wishes.

If consumption limits production, and if nonconsumption rises with rising incomes, then it indeed seems to follow that increasing incomes imply their own undoing by increasing nonconsumption, which in turn limits production, etc. And if this is so, it also seems to follow that wealthier societies, which non-consume more, should be plagued particularly hard by this “stagnitis”; and that in any given society it should be the rich, who nonconsume more, who contribute most to economic stagnation (except for the “minor” problem that one cannot explain, according to this theory, why individuals or societies could be wealthier than others in the first place!). In any case, Keynes accepts these conclusions as true.[^73] Accordingly, he presents his recommendations on how to get out of stagnation. In addition to a “comprehensive socialization of investment,” Keynes suggests measures to stimulate consumption, in particular an income redistribution from the rich (people with a low propensity to consume) to the poor (those with a high propensity to consume).

> Whilst aiming at a socially controlled rate of investment with a view to a progressive decline in the marginal efficiency of capital I should support at the same time all sorts of policies for increasing the propensity to consume. For it is unlikely that full employment can be maintained, whatever we may do about investment, with the existing propensity to consume. There is room, therefore, for both policies to operate together;—to promote investment and, at the same time, to promote consumption, not merely to the level which with the existing propensity to consume would correspond to the increased investment, but to a higher level still.[^74]

How is such a thing as simultaneously promoting investment and consumption in order to increase income conceivably possible? In fact, Keynes gives us his own formal definitions of the terms involved: “income = consumption + investment; saving = income - consumption; therefore, saving = investment.”[^75] Under these definitions, a simultaneous increase in consumption and investment out of a given income is conceptually impossible!

Keynes is not terribly disturbed over “details” such as these. In order to get what he wants, he simply shifts, completely unnoted, the meanings of his terms. He drops the just quoted formal definitions, which would render such a result impossible, and he adopts a new meaning for the term saving. Instead of unconsumed income, saving quietly comes to mean hoarding (i.e., the act of not-spending money on *either* consumer *or* capital goods).[^76] Thereby the results can be easily made to come out right. For then savings are no longer equal to investment; and saving, being defined as the act of *not*-spending, automatically acquires a negative connotation, while investment and consumption take on a positive one. Moreover, now one must almost naturally be worried about savings exceeding investment, or so it seems, for this would seem to imply that something is leaking out of the economy, and that income (defined as investment + consumption) must be somehow reduced. Keynes certainly worries about this possibility. He calls it “a chronic tendency throughout human history for the propensity to save to be stronger than the inducement to invest.”[^77] And this chronic tendency must surely be particularly pronounced if incomes are high, for then, as we have been told, savings reach a particularly high proportion of income. But do not despair. Where something can leak out, something also can leak in. If savings is unspent money, then savings can be brought into existence, simple enough, by means of governmental money creation, so as to compensate for the outward leakage which tends to increase with increasing incomes. There is the danger, of course, that these compensatory “community savings” immediately leak out again by being added to the private sector’s cash hoardings (because, according to Keynes, the newly created savings would lower the interest rate, and this in turn would increase the capitalists’ liquidity preference so as to counteract such a tendency and to artificially “keep capital scarce”). But this can be taken care of by the “socialization of investment” as we know, and by some Gesellian stamped money schemes (“The idea behind stamped money is sound”).[^78] And once saving and investing is done publicly—through the agency of the State, as Keynes would say—and all money is spent, and no keep-things-scarce motive is in the way any longer, there is indeed no longer any problem with increasing consumption and investment simultaneously. Since savings is unspent money, and newly created money and credit is just as genuine as any other because it is not “forced” on anyone, savings can be created by the stroke of a pen.[^79] And since the State, contrary to the scarcity-exploiting capitalists, can make sure that these additional genuine savings are indeed being spent (instead of wandering into hoards), any increase in the supply of money and credit through governmental counterfeiting increases consumption and investment at the same time and so promotes income twice. Permanent inflation is Keynes’s cure-all. It helps overcome stagnation; and more of it overcomes the more severe stagnation crises of the more advanced societies. And once stagnation is defeated, still more inflation will abolish scarcity within one generation.[^80]

Yet the wonders do not cease. What is this leakage, this surplus of savings over investment, that constitutes all such dangers? Something must leak from somewhere to someplace else, and it must play some role here and some there. Keynes tries to disperse such thoughts by asking us once again not to apply logic to economics. “Contemporary thought,” he writes, “is still deeply steeped in the notion that if people do not spend their money in one way they will spend it in another.”[^81] It would seem hard to imagine how this contemporary thought could possibly be wrong, but Keynes believes it false. For him there exists a third alternative. Something, an economic good one would think, simply drops out of existence, and this means trouble.

> An act of individual saving means—so to speak—a decision not to have dinner to-day. But it does *not* necessitate a decision to have dinner or buy a pair of boots a week hence or a year hence or to consume any specified thing at any specified date. Thus it depresses the business of preparing to-day’s dinner without stimulating the business of making ready for some future act of consumption. It is not a substitution of future consumption-demand for present consumption-demand—it is a net *diminution* of such demand.[^82]

Still, the strictures of a two-valued logic do not quite crumble yet. How can there be any net diminution of something? What is not spent on consumer goods or capital goods must still be spent on something else—namely on cash. *This exhausts all possibilities*. Income and wealth can be and must be allocated to consumption, investment, or cash. Keynes’s diminution, the leakage, the excess of savings over investment, is income spent on, or added to, cash hoardings. But such an increase in the demand for cash has no effect on income, consumption, and investment whatever, as has already been explained. With the social money stock being given, a general increase in the demand for cash can only be brought about by bidding down the money prices of nonmoney goods. But so what?[^83] Nominal income (i.e., income in terms of money) will fall; but real income and the real consumption-investment proportion will be entirely unchanged. And people along the way get what they want: an increase in the real value of their cash balances, and of the purchasing power of the money unit. There is nothing stagnating here, or draining, or leaking, and Keynes has offered *no theory of stagnation at all* (and with this, of course, also no theory of how to get out of stagnation). He merely has given a perfectly normal phenomenon such as falling prices (caused by an increased demand for money, or by an expanding productive economy) a bad name in calling it stagnation, or depression, or the result of a lacking effective demand, so as to find just another excuse for his own inflationary schemes.[^84]

Here we have Keynes in his entire greatness: the twentieth century’s most famous “economist.” Out of false theories of employment, money, and interest, he has distilled a fantastically wrong theory of capitalism and of a socialist paradise erected out of paper money.

[^67]: Keynes’s socialism, however, is not the egalitarian-proletarian version as espoused by the Bolsheviks. For this Keynes has nothing but contempt. His socialism is of the fascist or Nazi variety. In the preface to the German edition of his *General Theory* (which appeared in late 1936) he wrote:

::::> The theory of aggregate production that is the goal of the following book can be much more easily applied to the conditions of a totalitarian state than the theory of the production and distribution of a given output turned out under the conditions of free competition and of a considerable degree of *laissez-faire*. (quoted from Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* p. 277)

[^68]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 368\. On the Keynesian theory of stagnation see also Alvin H. Hanson, *Fiscal Policy and Business Cycles* (New York: Norton, 1941); for a critique see George Terborgh, *The Bogey of Economic Maturity* (Chicago: Machinery and Allied Products Institute, 1945); also Murray N. Rothbard, “Breaking Out of the Walrasian Box: The Cases of Schumpeter and Hansen,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 1 (1987).

[^69]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, pp. 372–73.

[^70]: Ibid., p. 96.

[^71]: Ibid., p. 97; also pp. 27f.

[^72]: In fact, Keynes informs us that *savings is by definition identical to investment* (p. 63), “that the excess of income over consumption, which we call saving, cannot differ from the addition to capital equipment which we call investment” (p. 64). Then, however, a reduced proportion of consumption expenditures must by definition go hand in hand with accordingly increased investments, and this would lead to a higher future income, to still more absolute consumption and still more absolute and relative saving and investment. Where, indeed, is the problem here?

[^73]: Keynes writes,

::::> If in a potentially wealthy community the inducement to invest is weak, then, in spite of its potential wealth, the working of the principle of effective demand will compel it to reduce its actual output, until, in spite of its potential wealth, it has become so poor that its surplus over its consumption is sufficiently diminished to correspond to the weakness of the inducement to invest. (*The General Theory*, p. 31)

::::Or:

::::> The greater, moreover, the consumption for which we have provided in advance, the more difficult it is to find something further to provide for in advance, and the greater our dependence on present consumption as a source of demand. Yet the larger our incomes, the greater, unfortunately, is the margin between our incomes and our consumption. So, failing some novel expedient, there is, as we shall see, no answer to the riddle, except that there must be sufficient unemployment to keep us so poor that our consumption falls short of our income by no more than the equivalent of the physical provision for future consumption which it pays to produce to-day. (p. 105)

[^74]: Ibid., p. 325; or “the remedy would lie in various measures designed to increase the propensity to consume by the redistribution of incomes or otherwise” (p. 324).

[^75]: Ibid., p. 63\. It is typical of Keynes’s philosophy of abundance that he gets things upside down here as well. For the correct definitions are: product produced = income; income - consumption = saving; saving = investment. Where does Keynes’s income come from?

[^76]: See on this also Hazlitt, *The Failure of the “New Economics,”* pp. 120–23.

[^77]: Keynes, *The General Theory*, p. 347.

[^78]: Ibid., p. 357.

[^79]: See on this note 51.

[^80]: On his program of permanent inflation see also this remark on the trade cycle: “The right remedy for the trade cycle is not to be found in abolishing booms and keeping us permanently in a semi-slump; but in abolishing slumps and thus keeping us permanently in a quasi-boom” (p. 322). The answer to credit expansion, that is, is still more credit expansion.

[^81]: Ibid., p. 20.

[^82]: Ibid., p. 210; second emphasis added.

[^83]: Contrary to Keynes’s fanciful fears, the demand for money can never be infinite, because everyone must obviously consume sometimes (and cannot delay consumption further); and at such points liquidity preference is definitely finite.

[^84]: The second element of Keynes’s stagnation theory is equally false. It may be that that saving in the definition of equaling investment increases overproportionally with increasing incomes—while it can never reach 100 percent. Yet this situation certainly should give no one concern regarding the social income produced. It is, however, *not* true that savings in the sense of hoarding increases with increasing incomes, and that the greatest leakage then occurs among the rich and in wealthy societies. The opposite is true. If real income increases because the economy, supported by additional savings, is expanding, the purchasing power of money increases (the money stock being given). But at a higher purchasing power of the money unit, the amount of cash demanded actually falls (the demand for money schedule being given). Thus, if anything, the leakstagnation nonproblem should actually diminish rather than increase with increasing wealth.
