## 就业，金钱，利息和资本主义过程理论：米塞斯反对凯恩斯的案例

我的目标是通过就业，金钱和利益重新构建关于经济发展过程及其在其中发挥的作用的一些基本真理。这些真理既不是奥地利经济学派的起源，也不是这种经济思想传统的组成部分。实际上，它们大多数都是现在所谓的古典经济学的重要组成部分，正是对经济学家与伪专家的区别进行了独特的区分。然而，奥地利学派，尤其是路德维希·冯·米塞斯(Ludwig von Mises)和后来的默里·罗斯巴德(Murray N. Rothbard)，已经给出了这些真相的最清楚和最完整的表述。[^1] 此外，他们还展示了他们最严密的辩护，表明他们是最终可以从基本的，无可争辩的命题（例如：人的行为，并知道行动的意义是什么）中推断出来，以便将它们确定为真理，否认它们不仅事实上是不正确的，而且更果断地说，将构成逻辑-实践的矛盾和荒谬。[^2]

首先，我将有系统地重构奥地利经济发展理论。 然后，我将转向凯恩斯的“新”理论，他本人不得不承认，属于“黑社会”经济学（如重商主义）和经济曲柄（如西尔维奥格塞尔）的传统。[^3] 我将证明凯恩斯的新经济学也是一派胡言：一组逻辑-行为的谬误，藉着晦涩的术语，定义的转移和逻辑的不一致性，意图创造一个反资本主义，反私有财产和反资产阶级的想法。

### 

#### 就业

“在没有阻碍的市场中，失业总是自愿的。”[^4] 人工作，因为他喜欢预期的结果，多过劳动的负面影响或闲暇带来的心理利益。 他“什么时候停止工作，就什么时候他开始重视闲暇，没有了劳动的负面影响，而不是更多地工作以增加满足感。”[^5] 显然，自给自足的鲁宾逊克鲁索(Robinson Crusoe)，作为自给自足的生产者，他只能自愿失业（因为他宁愿保持闲置，消耗现有的价值，而不是为未来而在生产中消耗额外的劳动力）。

当"星期五"来了，并且私有财产经济被建立起来时，结果并没有什么不同，因为初步确认了每个人的独占所有权，而这些资源被认为是稀缺，是通过抢先在他人之前将他的劳动与他们混合并占用的（家园式的），且在他们的帮助下生产的所有商品。 In this situation not only exchange ratios—prices—for the purchase or rental of material goods become possible, but also prices (wages) for the rental of labor services. Employment will ensue whenever the offered wage is valued more highly by the laborer than the satisfaction to be derived from self sufficiently working with and/or consuming his own resources (or of appropriating previously submarginal resources). Employment will increase, and wages rise, so long as entrepreneurs perceive existing wages as lower than the marginal value product (discounted by time preference)[^6] which a corresponding increment in the employment of labor can be expected to bring about. On the other hand, unemployment will result, and increase, so long as a person values the marginal value product attained through self-employment more highly than a wage that reflects his labor services’ marginal productivity.

In this construction there is no logical room for such a thing as involuntary unemployment. As employment is always voluntary, so is unemployment (self-employment).[^7]

Involuntary unemployment is only logically possible once the situation is fundamentally changed and a person or institution is introduced which can successfully exercise control over resources which he has not homesteaded, or acquired through voluntary exchange from homesteaders. Such an extra-market institution, by imposing, for instance, a minimum wage higher than the marginal productivity of labor, can effectively prohibit an exchange between a supplier of labor service and a capitalist which would be preferred by both, if both had unrestricted control over their homesteaded property. The would-be laborer then becomes involuntarily unemployed, and the would-be employer is forced to dislocate complementary factors of production from more into less value productive usages. As a matter of fact, an extra-market institution can in principle create any desired amount of involuntary unemployment. A minimum wage of say, $1 million per hour would, if enforced, involuntarily disemploy practically everyone and would, along this way toward forced self-employment, condemn most of today’s population to death by starvation.

In the absence of an institution exempt from the rules of the market involuntary unemployment is logically impossible, and prosperity instead of impoverishment will result.

#### Money

Man participates in an exchange economy (instead of remaining in self-sufficient isolation) insofar as he is capable of recognizing the higher productivity of a system of the division of labor and he prefers more goods over less. Out of his market participation arises in turn his desire for a medium of exchange (money). Indeed, only if one were to assume the humanly impossible (that man had perfect foresight regarding the future), would there be no purpose for him to have money. For with all uncertainties removed, in the never-never land of equilibrium one would know precisely the terms, times, and locations of all future exchanges, and everything could be prearranged accordingly and would take on the form of direct rather than indirect exchanges.[^8] Under the inescapable human condition of uncertainty, however, when all this is not known and action must by nature be speculative, man will begin to demand goods no longer exclusively because of their use-value, but also because of their value as media of exchange.

Faced with a situation where his reservation demand for some supplied goods or services is low or nonexistent, and where a directly satisfying exchange, due to the absence of double coincidences of wants, is out of the question, he will also consider trading whenever the goods to be acquired are more marketable than those to be surrendered, such that their possession would then facilitate the acquisition of directly serviceable goods and services at not yet known future dates.

Moreover, since it is the very function of a medium of exchange to facilitate future purchases of directly serviceable goods, man will naturally prefer the acquisition of a more marketable and, at the limit, universally marketable medium of exchange to that of a less or nonuniversally marketable one so that

> there would be an inevitable tendency for the less marketable of the series of goods used as media of exchange to be one by one rejected until at last only a single commodity remained, which was universally employed as a medium of exchange; in a word, money.[^9]

On the way toward this ultimate goal, by selecting monies that are increasingly more widely used, the division of labor is extended and productivity increased.

However, once a commodity has been established as a universal medium of exchange, and the prices of all directly serviceable exchange goods are expressed in terms of units of this money (while the price of the money unit is its power to purchase an array of nonmoney goods), money no longer exercises any systematic influence on the division of labor, employment, and produced income. Once established, any amount of money is compatible with any amount of employment and income.[^10] Indeed, as explained above, in the nevernever land of equilibrium there would be no money, but there would still be employment and income. This demonstrates that money on the one hand and employment and income on the other must be regarded as logically-praxeologically independent and unrelated concepts. For instance, should the supply of money increase, other things being equal, this would surely have redistributive effects, depending on where and how the additional money entered the economy; but it would just as surely have no systematic effect on the amount of employment and the size of the social product. Prices and wages generally would go up, and the purchasing power of the money unit would go down. However, nothing would follow with regard to employment and social product. They may be different, or they may be the same. The same is true of changes in the demand for money. An increase in the demand for money (i.e., a higher relative value attached to additional cash as compared to additional nonmoney), would certainly change relative prices; yet it would not imply anything as far as employment and social product is concerned. In equilibrating an increased demand for money with a given stock of money, the general level of prices and wages must fall, and the purchasing power of the money unit must rise, *mutatis mutandis*. But there is no reason to suppose that this should have any impact on employment or income. Money wages fall, but simultaneously the purchasing power of money increases, leaving real wages and real social product entirely unaffected.

The result is no different if changes on the nonmoney side are considered. Other things being equal, an increase in the supply of goods and services, for instance, brings about an increase in the purchasing power of money; money prices fall. This reduces the quantity of money demanded (the demand schedule for money being given), because the cost of holding onto money instead of spending it on non-money has risen; and this lowered demand for cash implies in turn a reverse tendency toward rising prices and a reduced purchasing power of money. Nothing concerning employment and social product follows. Nor does the picture change when expectations are explicitly taken into account. Inflationary (deflationary) expectations reduce (increase) the demand for money immediately and thus speed up the adjustment toward whatever has been anticipated; and if something wrong has been anticipated (i.e., something out of line with the underlying reality), then the process of self-corrective adjustments is sped up through the workings of expectations. But none of these monetary phenomena has any systematic praxeological connection with employment and social product, which may well remain the same throughout all monetary changes.

Invariably, money is “neutral” to employment and social product.

[^1]: See in particular Ludwig von Mises, *Human Action* (Chicago: Regnery, 1966); Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970).

[^2]: See on the foundations of economics Ludwig von Mises, *Epistemological Problems of Economics* (New York: New York University Press, 1981); idem, *Theory and History* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); idem, *The Ultimate Foundation of Economic Science* (Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 1978); Murray N. Rothbard, *Individualism and the Philosophy of the Social Sciences* (San Francisco: Cato Institute, 1979); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, *Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung. Untersuchugen zur Grundlegung von Soziologie und Ökonomie* (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1983); idem, *Praxeology and Economic Science* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

On the competing, positivist view of economics, according to which economic laws are hypotheses subject to empirical confirmation and falsification (much like the laws of physics), see Milton Friedman, “The Methodology of Positive Economics,” in idem, *Essays in Positive Economics* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953).

[^3]: John Maynard Keynes, *The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money* (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1964), esp. chap. 23.

[^4]: Mises, *Human Action*, p. 599.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 611.

[^6]: On time preference, see the following section 1.3.

[^7]: The claim that involuntary unemployment is possible in the framework of a private property economy as characterized above is due to an elementary logical-conceptual confusion: It ignores the fact that employment is a two-party affair; i.e., an exchange which, like any voluntary exchange, can only take place if it is deemed *mutually*, *bilaterally* beneficial. It makes no more sense to classify someone as involuntarily unemployed if he cannot find anybody willing to meet his unilaterally fixed demands for employment, than to call a person in search of a wife, a house, or a Mercedes involuntarily wifeless, homeless, or Mercedesless because no one wants to marry him or supply him with a house or a Mercedes *at terms which this person has unilaterally determined as agreeable to him.* Absurdity and contradiction would result if one were to do so. For then one would not only have to accept, as the other side of the same coin, that the boycotting employer, woman, or owner of a house or a Mercedes in turn would have to be regarded as an involuntary *non*employer, *non*wife, or *non*trader of a house or a Mercedes *because his/her unilateral demands had not been met by the wouldbe employee, would-be husband, or would-be house or Mercedes owner just as much as they had not met his*. Moreover, with both the would-be employee as well as the would-be employer classified as involuntarily being what they are because no mutual agreement had been reached between them, to create “voluntary employment” would imply coercing either one or both parties to accept an exchange whose terms one or both of them regard as unacceptable. Hence, to say involuntary unemployment is possible on the unhampered market is to say coercion means voluntariness and voluntariness coercion, which is nonsense.

[^8]: See Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 244–50.

> In a system without change in which there is no uncertainty whatever about the future, nobody needs to hold cash. Every individual knows precisely what amount of money he will need at any future date. He is therefore in a position to lend all the funds he receives in such a way that the loans fall due on the date he will need them. (p. 249)

See also Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, p. 280.

[^9]: Ludwig von Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit* (Irvington, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1971), pp. 32–33; see also Carl Menger, *Principles of Economics* (New York: New York University Press, 1981); idem, *Geld*, in Carl Menger, *Gesammelte Werke*, ed. F.A. Hayek (Tübingen: Mohr, 1970), vol. 4.

[^10]: See Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State*, pp. 669–71.

> Goods are useful and scarce, and any increment in goods is a social benefit. But money is useful not directly, but only in exchanges…. When there is less money, the exchange-value of the monetary unit rises; when there is more money, the exchange-value of the monetary unit falls. We conclude that there is no such thing as “too little” or “too much” money, *that, whatever the social money stock, the benefits of money are always utilized to the maximum extent*. (p. 670)

See also Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Snyder, 1983).
