La respuesta depende de si la preferencia demostrada para los servicios bancarios fraccionales, es decir, el asunto y la aceptación de media fiduciaria, involucra sola y exclusivamente a la propiedad de las dos partes contractuales o no. En cualquier momento dado, la cantidad de la propiedad (bienes apropiados) - ya sean bienes de consumo, bienes de producción o dinero - es dado. La reserva fraccional bancaria no aumenta la cantidad de las propiedades existentes (dinero u otros), ni transfiere la propiedad existente de una parte a la otra. En realidad, involucra la producción y venta de una cantidad aumentada de títulos a un stock estable de propiedad monetaria (oro); esto es, la provisión y la demanda de dinero falsificado y apropiación ilegítima. Cómo en todos los demás casos de falsificación (fraude)- de stock y certificados de mercancía, papel moneda, títulos de propiedad inmobiliaria, arte original, etc.- la emisión y la venta de dinero falsificado (papel moneda) descubierto por los originales (oro) disminuirá o dañará físicamente el dinero original- stock, mercancía, tierras o arte- propiedad de los dueños. Pero un falsificador de dinero es particularmente peligroso e invasivo por la característica principal del dinero, ya que es el más vendible y ampliamente aceptable de todos los bienes; esto es, porque la falsificación de *dinero*- le brinda a su vendedor el rango más amplio posible de bienes apropiables (desde dinero hasta cualquier otra forma real de propiedad).

Por ende, no es sorprendente que de todas las formas de fraude, la falsificación de dinero ha sido siempre la más atractiva. Mientras exista el dinero también existirá una persistente demanda de dinero falsificado. Más allá de esta atracción y demanda, sin embargo, no hay nada malo con respecto a una prohibición acerca de las reservas fraccionales bancarias. Nadie podría operar un banco de reservas fraccionales por la misma razón que nadie, en ninguna otra línea de negocios podría llevar a cabo una falsificación, es decir, la producción y venta de títulos o copias de propiedades u originales no existentes. En la corte judicial, sería suficiente que el dueño de un simple billete u otra propiedad inicie una demanda contra un banco de reservas fraccionales por manufactura de dinero falsificado, y el banco inmediatamente tendría que cesar su operación actual y sería limitado a sus dos funciones originales: depósitos y préstamos. Un banco de préstamos que presente la suma de intereses (más que el cobro de tarifas) es una contradicción en sí mismo: es un almacén de dinero falsificado, y debe ser prohibido, por no tener en cuenta ninguno de los beneficios acumulados para clientes del banco que hayan hecho depósitos o préstamo y dueños. Hacerlo no es una restricción en la libertad contractual para el mercado de servicios bancarios, si no para el requerimiento de dinero y sistema bancario legítimos. Qué todos pongan su dinero u otros recursos en depósito con tasa de interés deriva en apropiación excesiva e ilegítima.[^24]

La relación entre los estados y los bancos de reservas fraccionales es incluso más íntima, y en todo caso muy diferentes a las sugeridas por Selgin y White. Ellos aseguran que habría una interferencia ilegítima con la operación de mercados libres si el estado prohibiera los bancos de reservas fraccionales. De hecho, los bancos de reservas fraccionales son el resultado de una interferencia ilegítima del estado sobre los mercados, y prohibirlos sólo repararía esta intervención temprana. Selgin y White reconocen que en la evolución de un sistema bancario libre, los movimientos bancarios de reservas 100% por depósitos y, separados funcionalmente, los movimientos bancarios de préstamos, deben (praxeológicamente) preceder al sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales. En su perspectiva, el sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales es el crecimiento excesivo de un sistema anterior de reservas al 100%. Sin embargo, no ofrecen una explicación para esta transición como solución natural a un problema que no puede ser resuelto bajo el sistema bancario anterior, de 100 por ciento (de la manera en los austríacos conciben el dinero como la solución al problema de falta de coincidencia en la demanda, bajo el anterior sistema de trueque). Solamente afirman que la transición de hecho ya ha ocurrido.

Mientras uno puede ver fácilmente por qué y cómo un banquero podría querer aprovecharse de las posibilidades de la falsificación, es tan claro también que esa actividad no podría realizarse sin ser desafiado rápida y continuamente. Seguramente, los escritores actuales y miles de anteriores teóricos en lo legal y económico habrían acusado a los bancos de reservas fraccionales de falsificación y los hubieran demandado. En adelante, el curso de la evolución del sistema bancario dependería de una decisión de la corte. Si la corte decidiera que la emisión de media fiduciaria *siendo* títulos de dinero descubierto corresponde a una falsificación, los bancos de reservas fraccionales no podrían existir; y sólo si se decidiera algo diferente podrían realmente aparecer. Nada es natural en esta evolución; todo parece más bien deliberado. Naturalmente, tampoco el resultado de esos juicios sería del agrado de Selgin y White. Por el contrario, si uno asumiera que los banqueros de reservas fraccionales fueran acusados de cargos por falsificación frente a un jurado de sus propios pares (otros hombres de negocios), nos atreveríamos a decir que, empíricamente, el avasallante número de ese tipo de casos, terminarían en una condena (a pesar del testimonio de Selgin y White). ¿Por qué, entonces, la casi completa dominación del sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales?

La respuesta es que las cortes decidiendo sobre estos casos en todos lados son cortes estatales. Si una sola corte posee el monopolio territorial de la jurisdicción sería posible que la disputa que nos ocupa, podría ser resuelta de una vez por todas. Y aquello que ha sido resuelto uniformemente de la manera en la que se ha resuelto, es decir, permitiendo en lugar de prohibiendo el sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales, es consecuencia del interés de toda corte y juez *siendo*cortes estatales y jueces estatales. Los dueños y agentes del estado reconocen totalmente tanto como los banqueros, los potenciales de la falsificación de dinero así como de la fuente de ingreso. Al permitirle a los banqueros la emisión de media fiduciaria (más que prohibiendo la práctica como falsificación), los bancos resultan existencialmente dependientes del estado. Solamente pueden operar porque el estado, debido a su monopolio territorial de la jurisdicción, los protege de demandas por falsificación; y el estado sólo lo hace bajo la premisa de que los bancos compartirán con él los ingresos extras y el crédito derivado de la falsificación legalizada. Por consiguiente, al permitir un sistema bancario de reservas fraccionales libre el estado en realidad crea la primera y preliminar forma de cartel falsificador banco-estado bajo su control definitivo.

Once fractional reserve banking receives blanket protection from the state, it follows naturally that fractional reserve banks will outcompete 100 percent reserve banks. No, como Selgin y White[^25] aseveran, porque son bancos mejores o más eficientes, sino porque, una vez que se permite la falsificación de dinero, los bancos que la realizan tienden a superar en competencia a los bancos que no la realizan. That is, for the same reason that, once industrial air pollution is permitted a polluting steel producer will tend to outcompete a steel producer who does not pollute, and for the same reason that a protection agency with taxing powers, a state, will tend to outcompete protectors without taxing power. Put differently, it is not always the case that good drives out bad. This is the case only so long as private property rights are inviolate. If they are not, and there exist privileged agents or agencies, who are exempt from the universal rules regarding the appropriation, production and transfer of property, then these will tend to outcompete other normal agents. In this case, bad drives out good. Thus, it is completely mistaken to interpret the empirical success of fractional reserve banking as proof of its greater economic efficiency. The success of fractional over 100 percent deposit banking is no more a market phenomenon than is the success of tax-yielding protectors, states, over competitive and nontaxing security producers. It is false to suggest, as Selgin and White do, that fractional reserve banking has stood the market test and represents the outcome of voluntary consumer choices. After all, 100-percent-reserve-deposit banking is not outlawed and consumers are free to bank with them instead of fractional banks if they so prefer. Or would they likewise argue that the polluting steel producer had stood the test of the market because, after all, consumers are free to buy their steel from nonpolluting steel producers, or that states have proven themselves in the market because, after all, consumers are free to buy their security also from agencies without any tax and jurisdictional powers?[^26]

Moreover, whereas 100-percent-reserve banking is crisis-proof, fractional reserve banking, as even Selgin and White admit, is not in fact, as we can only briefly indicate here. A system of free fractional reserve banking will, in accordance with Mises’s theory of interventionism, lead to further state interventions and the successive devolution of money. Free fractional reserve banking *qua* state-protected competition in counterfeiting will lead to a steady contest among banks of testing the viability of increasingly lower reserve ratios. This is bound to lead to banking crises, and these will be used by governments for the introduction of central banking. Central banking leads to still more counterfeiting, and to the abolition of commodity money and adoption of national fiat currencies. Lastly, international—inter-central bank—competition in fiat money counterfeiting will lead to state bankruptcies, and their financial default will be used by the most powerful among the surviving states for the establishment of a one-world government, central bank, and fiat currency.

Hence, the solution proposed by Selgin and White to the current monetary disorder, that is, a gold-based free—fractional reserve—banking system, is in fact the initial interventionist cause of virtually all contemporary monetary problems.[^27]

[^24]: Explains Rothbard:

> The champions of free competition in counterfeiting retort that this is simply the market at work, that the market registers a “demand” for more expanded credit, and that the private bankers, those Kirznerian entrepreneurs, are simply “alert” to such market demands. Well, of course, there is always a “demand” for fraud, and embezzlement, on the market, and there will always be plenty of “alert” swindlers who are eager and willing to furnish a supply of these items. But if we define the “market” not simply as a supply of desired goods and services, but as a supply of such goods *within a* framework of inviolate property rights, then we see a very different picture. (“The Present State of Austrian Economics,” *Journal des Economistes et des Etudes Humaines* 6, no. 2, [1995]: 77)

[^25]: Selgin and White, “In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” pp. 97–98.

[^26]: A similar confusion characterizes Selgin and White’s view on the relationship between money proper (gold) and banknotes. They criticize Hoppe for claiming that, in a genuine free-market order, most people would use money proper rather than banknotes (without mentioning Hoppe’s theoretical reason). “The facts,” they claim, “are otherwise” (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 99). Yet these facts—the historical success of the banknote over genuine money—are *the result of an earlier state interference* with private-property rights (the legalization of fractional reserve banking). As Ludwig von Mises noted,

> [t]he truth is that, except for small groups of businessmen who were able to distinguish between good and bad banks, bank notes were always looked upon with distrust. It was the special charters which governments granted to privileged banks that slowly made these suspicions disappear. (p. 438)
> 
> In [governments’] eyes the foremost task of the banks was to lend money to the treasury. The money-substitutes were favorably considered as pace-makers for government-issued paper money. The convertible banknote was merely a first step on the way to the nonredeemable banknote. With the progress of statolatry and the policy of interventionism these ideas have become general and are no longer questioned by anybody. (p. 442)
> 
> Governments did not foster the use of bank notes in order to avoid inconvenience to ladies shopping. Their idea was to lower the rate of interest and to open a source of cheap credit to their treasuries. In their eyes the increase in the quantity of fiduciary media was a means of promoting welfare. Banknotes are not indispensable. All the economic achievements of capitalism would have been accomplished if they had never existed. (*Human Action: A Treatise on Economics*, 3rd rev. ed. [Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1966], p. 447)

Accordingly, Mises’s view regarding sound money is completely different from Selgin and White’s. Whereas the latter believe that gold would—and should—ultimately disappear from circulation altogether (see note 3 above), Mises considered it a requirement of a sound monetary system that

> [g]old must be in the cash holdings of everybody. Everybody must see gold coins changing hands, must be used to having gold coins in his pockets, to receiving gold coins when he cashes his pay check, and to spending gold coins when he buys in a store. (*The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 450–51)

[^27]: On the relationship between state money and banking and political centralization see Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Banking, Nation States, and International Politics,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 4 (1990): 55–87; and Jörg Guido Hülsmann, “Banking and Political Centralization,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 13, no. 1 (1997). Selgin and White argue:

> We also reject the notion … that *competitive* banks issuing redeemable liabilities can create credit “out of thin air.” By the nature of the balance sheet, all bank loans must be funded by liabilities or equity. Neither source of funds can be conjured out of thin air. No one is forced to hold a competitive bank’s redeemable liabilities or to buy its shares; anyone can hold claims on other banks instead, or on no bank. A competitive bank must therefore *expend real resources to attract a clientele* by the provision of interest and services. The notion that a bank can extend credit … gratuitously is valid only with respect to the inframarginal credits of a monopoly bank, or to [the] issuer of a forced tender; it does not apply to a bank in a competitive system. (p. 94, n. 13)
> 
> Thus competition will beat down the returns to capital invested in fractional-reserve banking until the marginal bank is earning only the normal rate of return. (“In Defense of Fiduciary Media,” p. 97)

While we have no difficulty accepting the distinction drawn here between competitive and monopolistic banking, none of this has any bearing on the issue at hand, that is, the validity of the analogy between states and fractional reserve banks as outlaw organizations. For one, states have to compete for clients (residents). Indeed, competition between states (or banks) for clients only comes to a complete halt with the establishment of a single world state (or central bank). And the intra-state competition between fractional reserve banks is, as explained, competition within a state-privileged industry; that is, monopolistic competition (just as inter-state competition is an example of monopolistic competition). Second and more importantly, the difference between competitive and monopolistic banks (or states), interesting as it may otherwise be, does not affect in the slightest their common characteristic as fractional reserve banks (or states). Counterfeiting and taxation do not change their nature because they are undertaken competitively.

The error can be revealed by analogy. Selgin and White are paraphrased here: We also reject the notion that competitive states issuing tax liabilities can create taxes out of thin air. By the nature of state budgets all expenditures must be funded by conquest, robbery, or theft. Neither source of funds can be conjured out of thin air. No one is forced to hold any particular state’s tax liabilities or buy its shares; anyone can move and pay taxes to another state, or to no state. A competitive state must therefore *expend real resources* to attract a clientele by the provision of protection and services. The notion that a state can increase taxes gratuitously is valid only with respect to the inframarginal taxes of a monopoly state; it does not apply to a state in a competitive system. Thus, competition will beat down the returns to capital invested in states until the marginal state is earning only the normal rate of return.

According to Selgin and White, it would seem to follow that taxation (like money counterfeiting) is not to be considered a problem until the arrival of a single world monopoly bank. Up until then, under competitive conditions, taxes represent nothing but a normal market income.