### De depósito y préstamo bancario fraccional de reserva bancario: la devolución del crédito

Los bancos realizan dos tareas estrictamente separadas, sólo uno de los cuales se ha considerado hasta ahora. [^20] Por un lado, sirven como depósito de las instituciones, ofreciendo custodia y servicios de limpieza. Aceptan depósitos de dinero (de mercancía) y emiten reclamos de dinero (recibos de almacén, sustitutos de dinero) a sus depositantes, canjeables a la par y bajo demanda. Para reclamo de dinero emitido por ellos tienen una cantidad equivalente de dinero genuino en mano, listo para la redención (100% banco de reserva). Ningún interés es pagado sobre los depósitos. Por el contrario, los depositantes pagan una cuota al Banco para proporcionar custodia y servicios de limpieza. En condiciones de libre competencia—libre entrada en la industria bancaria—la tasa de depósito, que constituye los ingresos en bancos y posible fuente de beneficios, tiende a ser una tarifa mínima; y los beneficios—o mejor dicho, el interés vuelve—ganados en la banca tienden a ser los mismos que en cualquier otra industria no bancaria.

Por otra parte, originalmente enteramente separados institucionalmente de las instituciones de depósito, los bancos también sirven como intermediarios entre los ahorradores y los inversores—como bancos de préstamo. En esta función la primera oferta y entrar en el tiempo-contratos con ahorradores. Los ahorradores prestan dinero al banco para un especificado—mayor o menor—período de tiempo a cambio de la obligación contractual del banco de luego pagar más algún interés adicional. Desde el punto de vista de los ahorradores, intercambian dinero presente por una promesa de dinero futuro: el retorno de los intereses constituye su recompensa por realizar la función de esperar. Habiendo adquirido de este modo la propiedad temporal de los ahorros de los ahorradores, el banco traslada el mismo dinero a los inversores (incluido si mismo) a cambio de la obligación de amortización e intereses futuros. El diferencial de intereses—la diferencia entre el interés pagado a los ahorradores y el que se cobra a los prestatarios—representa el precio de intermediación entre ahorradores e inversores y constituye el ingreso del banco de préstamos. En cuanto a la banca de depósito y las tasas de depósito, en condiciones competitivas, los costos de intermediación también tienden a ser costos mínimos, y las ganancias de la banca de préstamos también tienden a ser las mismas que se pueden obtener en otros lugares.

Ni la banca de depósito ni la banca de préstamos, como se caracteriza aquí, implican un aumento en la oferta de dinero o un ingreso unilateral o redistribución de la riqueza. Por cada nota de depósito emitida recientemente se saca de circulación una cantidad equivalente de dinero (solo cambia la forma del dinero, no su cantidad), y en el curso de la banca de préstamos la misma suma de dinero simplemente cambia de manos repetidamente. Todos los intercambios entre depositantes e instituciones depositantes, así como entre ahorristas, bancos intermediarios e inversores, son mutuamente ventajosos.

Por el contrario, la banca de reserva fraccionaria implica una confusión deliberada entre el depósito y la función de préstamo. Implica un aumento en la oferta de dinero y conduce a una redistribución unilateral del ingreso a favor del banco, así como a ineficiencias económicas en forma de ciclos económicos de auge y caída.

La confusión de ambas funciones bancarias sale a la luz en el hecho de que bajo la banca de reserva fraccional, a los depositantes se les pagan intereses (en lugar de tener que pagar una tarifa) y/o se les otorga el derecho de retiro inmediato (en lugar de tener que esperar con su solicitud de reembolso hasta una fecha futura específica). Técnicamente, la posibilidad de que un banco se involucre en tales prácticas surge del hecho de que los tenedores de depósitos a la vista (reclamos de dinero rescatables a pedido, instantáneamente, a la par) típicamente *no* ejercen su derecho simultáneamente, de modo que todos se acercan al banco con la solicitud de redención al mismo tiempo. En consecuencia, un banco de depósito normalmente tendrá una cantidad de reservas (de dinero propiamente dicho) en exceso de los retiros diarios reales. Por lo tanto, es factible que el banco preste estas reservas "excedentes" a los prestatarios, lo que le permite obtener una devolución de intereses (que el banco puede transferir parcialmente a sus depositantes en forma de cuentas de depósito que pagan intereses).

Los defensores de la banca de reserva fraccionaria suelen afirmar que esta práctica de mantener reservas inferiores al 100 por ciento representa meramente una "economía" de dinero inocuo, y les gusta señalar que no solo el banco, sino los depositantes (que reciben intereses) y los ahorradores (que reciben derechos de extracción) también se benefician de la práctica. De hecho, la banca de reserva fraccionaria adolece de dos fallas fatales interrelacionadas y es todo menos inócuo y beneficiosa. En primer lugar, debe tenerse en cuenta que cualquier depósito bancario de reserva de menos del 100% implica lo que se podría llamar una imposibilidad legal, ya que al emplear sus reservas excedentes para la concesión de crédito, el banco transfiere la titularidad temporal de ellas a algún prestatario, mientras los depositantes, con derecho, ya que son para la redención instantánea, conservan su propiedad sobre los mismos fondos. Sin embargo, es imposible que por un tiempo el depositante *y* el prestatario tengan derecho a un control exclusivo sobre los mismos recursos. Dos personas *no pueden* ser el propietario exclusivo de una y la misma cosa al mismo tiempo. En consecuencia, cualquier banco que pretenda lo contrario—al asumir responsabilidades por la demanda que superen las reservas actuales—debe considerarse que actúa de manera fraudulenta. Sus obligaciones contractuales *no pueden* cumplirse. Desde el principio, el banco debe considerarse inherentemente en bancarrota—como lo revela el hecho de que no podría, contrariamente a su propia presunción, resistir una posible corrida bancaria.

Segundo, al prestar sus reservas excedentes a los prestatarios, el banco aumenta la oferta monetaria, independientemente de si los prestatarios reciben estas reservas en forma de dinero propiamente dicho o en forma de depósitos a la vista (cuentas corrientes). Si el préstamo adopta la forma de dinero genuino, entonces la cantidad de dinero propiamente dicha se incrementa sin retirar una cantidad equivalente de sustitutos de dinero de la circulación; y si toma la forma de una cuenta de cheques, entonces la cantidad de sustitutos de dinero se incrementa sin sacar la cantidad correspondiente de dinero genuino fuera de circulación. En cualquier caso, habrá más dinero en existencia ahora que antes, llevando a una reducción en el poder adquisitivo del dinero (inflación) y, en su curso, a una redistribución sistemática del ingreso real a favor del banco y sus clientes prestatarios y a expensas del público no bancario y todos los demás clientes bancarios. El banco recibe ingresos adicionales por intereses mientras que no aporta ninguna contribución adicional a la riqueza real del público no bancario (como sería el caso si el rendimiento de los intereses fuera el resultado de un gasto bancario reducido, es decir, ahorros); y los prestatarios adquieren activos reales no monetarios con sus fondos, lo que reduce la riqueza real del resto del público en la misma cantidad.

Además, en la medida en que el banco no gasta simplemente las reservas sobrantes en su propio consumo sino que las contrae con intereses, invariablemente se pone en marcha un ciclo económico.[^21] La cantidad de crédito ofrecido es mayor que antes. Como consecuencia, el precio del crédito—el interés cobrado por los préstamos—caerá por debajo de lo que hubiera sido de otra manera. A un precio menor, se toma más crédito. Dado que el dinero no puede generar más dinero, para poder obtener un retorno de los intereses y una ganancia pura adicional, los prestatarios deberán convertir sus fondos prestados en inversiones. Es decir, tendrán que comprar o alquilar factores de producción—la tierra, el trabajo y posiblemente los bienes de capital (factores de producción producidos)—capaces de producir una producción futura de bienes cuyo valor (precio) exceda al de la entrada. De acuerdo con un volumen de crédito expandido, más recursos actualmente disponibles estarán ligados en la producción de bienes *futuros* (en lugar de ser usados para el consumo presente) de lo que hubieran sido de otro modo; y para completar todos los proyectos de inversión en curso, se necesitará más tiempo que el requerido para completar solo aquellos que se habrían comenzado sin la expansión del crédito. Se deben producir todos los bienes futuros que se habrían creado sin la expansión más aquellos que se han agregado recientemente a causa de la expansión del crédito.

However, in distinct contrast to the situation in which the interest rate falls due to a fall in the rate of time preference (the degree to which present goods are preferred over future goods), and hence where the public has in fact saved more so as to make a larger fund of present goods available to investors in exchange for their promise of a return of future goods, no such change in time preference and savings has taken place in the case under consideration. The public has *not* saved more, and accordingly, the additional amount of credit granted by the bank does not represent *commodity credit* (credit covered by nonmoney goods which the public has abstained from consuming), but it is *fiduciary* or *circulation credit* (credit that has been literally created out of thin air—without any corresponding sacrifice, in the form of nonconsumed nonmoney goods, on the part of the creditor).[^22] Had the additional credit been commodity credit, an expanded volume of investment activities would have been warranted. There would have been a sufficiently large supply of present goods that could be devoted to the production of future goods such that all—the old as well as the newly begun—investment projects could be successfully completed and a higher level of future consumption attained. If the credit expansion is due to the granting of circulation credit, however, the ensuing volume of investment must actually prove overambitious. Misled by a lower interest rate, investors act *as if* savings had increased. They withdraw more of the presently available resources for investment projects, to be converted into future capital goods, than is warranted in light of actual savings. Consequently, capital goods prices will increase initially relative to consumer goods prices, but once the public’s underlying time preference rate begins to reassert itself, a systematic shortage of consumer goods will arise. Accordingly, the interest rate will adjust upward, and it is now consumer goods prices which rise relative to capital goods prices, requiring the liquidation of part of the investment as unsustainable malinvestment. The earlier boom will turn bust, reducing the future standard of living below the level that otherwise could have been reached.

Among recent proponents of fractional reserve banking the cases of Lawrence White and George Selgin[^23] deserve a few critical comments, if for no other reason than that both are critics of Friedmanite monetarism who hark back, instead, to the tradition of Austrian and in particular Misesian monetary theory.[^24] Their monetary ideal is a universal commodity money such as an international gold standard and, based on this, a system of competitive banking which, they claim, would—and should be permitted to do so for reasons of economic efficiency as well as justice—engage in fractional reserve banking and the granting of fiduciary credit.

As to the question of justice, White and Selgin offer but one argument destined to show the allegedly nonfraudulent character of fractional reserves: that outlawing such a practice would involve a violation of the principle of freedom of contract by preventing “banks and their customers from making whatever sorts of contractual arrangements are mutually agreeable.”[^25] Yet this is surely a silly argument. First off, as a matter of historical fact fractional reserve banks never informed their depositors that some or all of their deposits would actually be loaned out and hence could not possibly be ready for redemption at any time. (Even if the bank were to pay interest on deposit accounts, and hence it *should* have been clear that the bank *must* loan out deposits, this does not imply that any of the depositors actually understand this fact. Indeed, it is safe to say that few if any do, even among those who are not economic illiterates.) Nor did fractional reserve banks inform their borrowers that some or all of the credit granted to them had been created out of thin air and was subject to being recalled at any time. How, then, can their practice be called anything but fraud and embezzlement!

Second, and more decisive, to believe that fractional reserve banking should be regarded as falling under and protected by the principle of freedom of contract involves a complete misunderstanding of the very meaning of this principle. Freedom of contract does not imply that *every* mutually advantageous contract should be permitted. Clearly, if A and B contractually agree to rob C, this would not be in accordance with the principle. Freedom of contract means instead that A and B should be allowed to make any contract whatsoever *regarding their own properties*, yet fractional reserve banking involves the making of contracts regarding the property of third parties. Whenever the bank loans its “excess” reserves to a borrower, such a bilateral contract affects the property of third parties in a threefold way. First, by thereby increasing the money supply, the purchasing power of all other money owners is reduced; second, all depositors are harmed because the likelihood of their successfully recovering their own possessions is lowered; and third, all other borrowers—borrowers of commodity credit—are harmed because the injection of fiduciary credit impairs the safety of the entire credit structure and increases the risk of a business failure for every investor of commodity credit.

In order to overcome these objections to the claim that fractional reserve banking accords with the principle of freedom of contract, White and Selgin then, as their last line of defense, withdraw to the position that banks may attach an “option clause” to their notes, informing depositors that the bank may at any time suspend or defer redemption, and letting borrowers know that their loans may be instantly recalled.[^26] While such a practice would indeed dispose of the charge of fraud, it is subject to another fundamental criticism, for such notes would no longer be *money* but a peculiar form of *lottery tickets*.[^27] It is the function of money to serve as the most easily resalable and most widely acceptable good, so as to prepare its owner for instant purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at not yet known future dates; hence, whatever may serve as money so as to be instantly resalable at any future point in time, it must be something that bestows an *absolute* and *unconditional* property right on its owner. In sharp contrast, the owner of a note to which an option clause is attached does *not* possess an unconditional property title. Rather, similar to the holder of a “fractional reserve parking ticket” (where more tickets are sold than there are parking places on hand, and lots are allocated according to a “first-come-firstserved” rule), he is merely entitled to participate in the drawing of certain prizes, consisting of ownership or time-rental services to specified goods according to specified rules. But as drawing rights—and not unconditional ownership titles—they only possess *temporally conditional* value until the time of the drawing, and they become worthless as soon as the prizes have been allocated to the ticket holders; thus, they would be uniquely *un*suited to serve as a medium of exchange.

As regards the second contention: that fractional reserve banking is economically efficient, it is noteworthy to point out that White, although he is undoubtedly familiar with the Austrian-Misesian claim that *any* injection of fiduciary credit must result in a boom-bust cycle, nowhere even mentions the problem of business cycles. Only Selgin addresses the problem. In his attempt to show that fractional reserve banking does not cause business cycles, however, Selgin then falls headlong into the fundamental Keynesian error of confusing the demand for money (determined by the utility of money) and savings (determined by time preference).[^28]

According to Selgin, “to hold inside money is to engage in voluntary saving”; and accordingly “an increase in the demand for money warrants an increase in bank loans and investments” because

> [w]henever a bank expands its liabilities in the process of making new loans and investments, it is the holders of the liabilities who are the ultimate lenders of credit, and what they lend are the real resources they could acquire if, instead of holding money, they spent it.[^29]

Based on this view of the holding of money as representing saving and an increased demand for money as being the same thing as increased saving, then, Selgin goes on to criticize Mises’s claim that *any* issuance of fiduciary media, in lowering the interest rate below its “natural” level, must cause a business cycle as “confused.” “No ill consequences result from the issue of fiduciary media in response to a greater demand for balances of inside money.”[^30]

Yet the confusion is all Selgin’s. First off, it is false to say that the holding of money (the act of not spending it), is equivalent to saving. One might as well say—and this would be equally wrong—that the not-spending of money is equivalent to *not* saving. In fact, saving is not-consuming, and the demand for money has nothing to do with saving or not-saving. The demand for money is the unwillingness to buy or rent nonmoney goods, and these include consumer goods (present goods) *and* capital goods (future goods). Not-spending money is to purchase, *neither* consumer goods *nor* investment goods. Contrary to Selgin, then, matters are as follows: Individuals may employ their monetary assets in one of three ways. They can spend them on consumer goods; they can spend them on investment; or they can keep them in the form of cash. There are no other alternatives. While a person must at all times make decisions regarding three margins at once, invariably the outcome is determined by two distinct and praxeologically unrelated factors. The consumption/investment proportion (the decision of how much of one’s money to spend on consumption and how much on investment) is determined by a person’s time preference (the degree to which he prefers present consumption over future consumption). On the other hand, the source of his demand for cash is the utility attached to money (the personal satisfaction derived from money in allowing him immediate purchases of directly or indirectly serviceable consumer or producer goods at uncertain future dates).

Accordingly, if the demand for money increases while the social stock of money is given, this additional demand can only be satisfied by bidding down the money prices of nonmoney goods. The purchasing power of money will increase, the *real* value of individual cash balances will be raised, and at a higher purchasing power per unit money, the demand for and the supply of money will once again be equilibrated. The relative price of money versus nonmoney will have changed. But unless time preference is assumed to have changed at the same time, *real* consumption and *real* investment will remain the same as before: the additional money demand is satisfied by reducing nominal consumption *and* investment spending in accordance with the same pre-existing consumption/investment proportion, driving the money prices of both consumer as well as producer goods down and leaving real consumption and investment at precisely their old levels. If time preference is assumed to change concomitantly with an increased demand for money, however, then everything is possible. Indeed, if spending were reduced exclusively on investment goods, an increased demand for money could even go hand in hand with an increase in the rate of interest and reduced saving and investment. However, this, or the equally possible opposite outcome, would not be due to a change in the demand for money but exclusively to a change (a rise, or a fall) in the time preference schedule. In any case, if the banking system were to follow Selgin’s advice and accommodate an increased demand for cash by issuing fiduciary credit, the social rate of time preference would be falsified, excessive investment would result, and a boom-bust cycle would be set in motion, rendering the practice of fractional reserve banking fraudulent *as well as* economically inefficient.

White’s and Selgin’s proposal of a commodity money based system of competitive fractional reserve banking—of partial fiat money—is neither just (and hence the term “free banking” is inappropriate), nor does it produce economic stability. It is no fundamental improvement as compared to the monetarist reality of monopolistically issued pure fiat currencies. Indeed, in one respect Friedman’s pure fiat money proposal contains a more realistic and correct analysis than White’s and Selgin’s because Friedman recognizes “what used to be called ‘the inherent instability’ of fractional reserve banking,” and he understands that this inherent instability of competitive fractional reserve banking will sooner or later collapse in a “liquidity crisis” and then lead to his favored regime—a governmentally provided pure fiat currency—anyway.[^31]

Only a system of universal commodity money (gold), competitive banks, *and* 100-percent-reserve deposit banking with a strict functional separation of loan and deposit banking constitutes a just monetary system that can assure economic stability and present a genuine answer to the current monetarist fiasco.

[^20]: On the following see in particular Murray N. Rothbard, *The Mystery of Banking* (New York: Richardson and Synder, 1983); idem, *The Case for a 100 Percent Gold Dollar* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1991); Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*; idem, *Human Action*; also Walter Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” in *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard*, Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds. (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); S. Koch, *Fractional Reserve Banking: A Practical Critique* (Master’s thesis, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 1992).

[^21]: On the theory of the business cycle see in particular Ludwig von Mises, *Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik* (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1928); idem, *Human Action*, chap. 20; F.A. Hayek, *Prices and Production* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1931); Murray N. Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression* (Kansas City: Sheed and Ward, 1975).

[^22]: On the fundamental distinction between commodity credit and circulation credit, see Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, pp. 263ff.

[^23]: See Lawrence White, *Competition and Currency* (New York: New York University Press, 1989); George Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking* (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1988).

[^24]: For a critique of White and Selgin as misinterpreting the fundamental thrust of Mises’s theory of money and banking see Joseph Salerno, “The Concept of Coordination in Austrian Macroeconomics,” in *Austrian Economics: Perspectives on the Past and Prospects for the Future*, Richard Ebeling, ed. (Hillsdale, Mich.: Hillsdale College Press, 1991); idem, “Mises and Hayek Dehomogenized,” *Review of Austrian Economics* 6, no. 2 (1993): 113–46.

[^25]: White, *Competition and Currency*, p. 156, also pp. 55–56; George Selgin, “Short-Changed in Chile: The Truth about the Free-Banking Episode,” *Austrian Economics Newsletter* (Winter/Spring, 1990): 5.

[^26]: White, *Currency and Competition*, p. 157; Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 137.

[^27]: See Block, “Fractional Reserve Banking: An Interdisciplinary Perspective,” p. 30.

[^28]: For a critique of this error see Rothbard, *America’s Great Depression*, pp. 39–43; Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “Theory of Employment, Money Interest, and the Capitalist Process: The Misesian Case Against Keynes,” in *The Economics and Ethics of Private Property*, Hoppe, ed. (Boston: Kluwer, 1993), pp. 119–20, 137–38.

[^29]: Selgin, *The Theory of Free Banking*, p. 55.

[^30]: Ibid., pp. 61–62.

[^31]: See Friedman and Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?”