### Del dinero mercancía al dinero Fiat: la devolución del dinero

Si el dinero debe presentarse como un dinero mercancía, ¿cómo puede convertirse en dinero fiat? Lo hace mediante el desarrollo de sustitutos del dinero (títulos en papel para el dinero mercancía), pero solo de manera fraudulenta y solo al precio de las ineficiencias económicas.

Bajo un estándar de dinero de mercancía, como el patrón de oro hasta 1914, el dinero "circuló" por un lado en forma de barras estandarizadas de lingotes y monedas de oro de varias denominaciones intercambiando entre sí en proporciones esencialmente fijas de acuerdo con su peso y finura. Por otro lado, economizar en el costo de almacenamiento (depósito) y transacción (compensación) de dinero, en un desarrollo similar al de los títulos de propiedad transferibles -incluidos los certificados de acciones y bonos- como medio para facilitar el intercambio espacial y temporal de bienes *no* monetario, al lado del dinero propiamente dicho también certificados de oro—títulos de propiedad (reclamaciones) a cantidades especificadas de oro depositadas en instituciones específicas (bancos)—conservados como medio de intercambio. Esta coexistencia de dinero en efectivo (oro) y sustitutos del dinero (reclamaciones de dinero) no afecta ni el suministro total de dinero—para un certificado puesto en circulación, una cantidad equivalente de oro se saca de la circulación (depositada)— o el ingreso interpersonal y la riqueza distribución. Todavía, sin lugar a dudas, la coexistencia de dinero y sustitutos del dinero y la posibilidad de mantener el dinero en cualquier forma y en combinaciones variables de tales formas constituye una conveniencia adicional para los participantes del mercado individual. Así es como las hojas de papel intrínsecamente sin valor pueden adquirir poder adquisitivo. Si y en la medida en que representan un reclamo incondicional de dinero y si en la medida en que no existan dudas de que son válidos y pueden ser canjeados en cualquier momento, los boletos en papel son comprados y vendidos *como si* fueran dinero genuino a la par. Una vez que han adquirido el poder adquisitivo y luego se les priva de su carácter como reclamo de dinero (de algún modo suspender la redimibilidad), pueden seguir funcionando como dinero. Como Mises escribe:

> Antes de que un bien económico comience a funcionar como dinero, este debe poseer valor de cambio basado en alguna otra causa que su función monetaria. Pero el dinero que ya funciona como tal puede seguir siendo valioso incluso cuando la fuente original de su valor de cambio haya dejado de existir.[^9]

Sin embargo, ¿sería egoista *querer* privar a billetes en papel de su carácter como títulos de dinero? ¿Podrían ellos *querer* suspender la posibilidad de canje y adoptar intrínsecamente pedazos de papel sin valor como dinero? Campeones de papel moneda como Milton Friedman reclaman que este es el caso, y por lo general citan un motivo de ahorro como la razón para la sustitución de fiat por dinero mercancía: un estándar de oro implica el desperdicio social al requerir la extracción y acuñación de oro. Se deben dedicar recursos considerables a la producción de dinero.[^10] Con papel moneda esencialmente sin costo en lugar de oro, ese desperdicio desaparecería y los recursos se liberarían para la producción de bienes de consumo o bienes de consumo directamente útiles. Por lo tanto, es una mayor eficiencia económica de dinero fiat que explica el abandono universal del dinero mercancía en el mundo presente. ¿Pero es así? ¿Es el triunfo del dinero fiat el resultado de algún ahorro inocuo? ¿Es incluso concebible que podría ser? ¿Pueden los individuos egoístas realmente *querer* ahorrar ya que los campeones de dinero fiat suponen que sí?

Un examen más cercano revela que esto es imposible, y que la institución del dinero fiat requiere la asunción de un muy diferente—no inofensivo pero siniestro—motivo: Supongamos una economía monetaria con (al menos) un banco y dinero propio ("dinero exterior" en la jerga moderna) así como los sustitutos del dinero ("dinero interno") en circulación. Si los participantes en el mercado querían ahorrar en los costos de recursos de un dinero de mercado (con el objetivo final de desmonetizar el oro y monetizar el papel), uno esperaría que primero —como una aproximación a este objetivo—quisieran renunciar a usar cualquier dinero (oro). Todas las transacciones tendrían que llevarse a cabo con dinero interno (papel), y todo el dinero externo tendría que depositarse en un banco y retirarse por completo de la circulación (de lo contrario, mientras el dinero genuino aún estuviera en circulación, aquellos individuos haciendo uso de monedas de oro demostrarían inconfundiblemente—a través de sus propias acciones—que *no* querrían ahorrar en los costos de recursos asociados.)

Sin embargo, ¿es posible que los sustitutos del dinero puedan competir y desplazar el dinero genuino como medio de cambio? Incluso muchos teóricos del dinero duro han sido demasiado rápidos para admitir tal posibilidad. La razón es que los sustitutos del dinero son *sustitutos* y tienen una desventaja permanente y decisiva en comparación con el dinero propiamente dicho. Las notas en papel (reclamos de dinero) se pueden canjear a la par solo en la medida en que se haya pagado una tarifa de depósito a la institución depositaria. Proporcionar servicios de protección y compensación es un negocio costoso, y una tarifa de depósito es el precio pagado por el dinero custodiado. Si las notas en papel se presentan para su reembolso después de la fecha hasta la cual el depositante original o anterior pagó las tarifas de protección, la institución depositaria tendría que imponer un cargo de canje y dichas notas se negociarían a descuento con respecto al dinero genuino. La desventaja de los sustitutos del dinero es que deben volverse a depositar y volver a emitir continuamente a fin de mantener su carácter de dinero—sus posibilidades de venta a la par—y, por lo tanto, que funcionen como dinero solo de forma temporal y discontinua. Solo el dinero apropiado (monedas de oro) es permanentemente adecuado para realizar la función como medio de intercambio. En consecuencia, lejos de estar el dinero interno desplazando el dinero externo, el uso de sustitutivos del dinero deberia esperarse que siempre esté severamente limitado—restringido esencialmente a la transacción de sumas de dinero muy grandes y las transacciones entre comerciantes comerciales regulares—mientras que la mayor parte del dinero de la población emplearía el dinero propiamente dicho para la mayoría de sus compras o ventas, demostrando así su preferencia por *no* querer ahorrar en la forma en que lo imaginó Friedman.[^11]

Por otra parte, incluso si se asume por el argumento de que solo el dinero interno está en circulación mientras todo el dinero genuino se almacena en un banco, las dificultades para los defensores del dinero fiat no terminan aquí. Para estar seguros, en su opinión, los asuntos parecen bastante simples: todo el dinero de los productos básicos permanece inactivo en el banco. ¿No sería más eficiente si todo este oro inactivo se usara en su lugar para fines de consumo o producción—para odontología o joyería—mientras que la función de un medio de cambio fuera asumida por un menos costoso —de hecho, prácticamente sin costo—dinero fiat? No, en absoluto.

First, the envisioned demonetization of gold certainly cannot mean that a bank thereby assumes ownership of the entire money stock, while the public gets to keep the notes. No one except the bank owner would agree to that! No one would want *such* savings. In fact, this would not be savings at all but an expropriation of the public by and to the sole advantage of the bank. No one could possibly *want* to be expropriated by somebody else. (Yet the expropriation of privately owned commodity money through governments and their central banks is the only method by which commodity money has ever been replaced by fiat money.) Instead, each depositor would want to retain ownership of his deposits and get his gold back.

Then, however, an insurmountable problem arises: Regardless who—the bank or the public—now owns the notes, they represent nothing but irredeemable paper. Formerly, the cost associated with the production of such paper was by no means only that of printing paper tickets, but more importantly that of attracting gold depositors through the provision of safeguarding and clearing services. Now, with irredeemable paper there is nothing worth guarding anymore. The cost of money production falls close to zero, to mere printing costs. Previously, with paper representing claims to gold, the notes had acquired purchasing power. But how can the bank or the public get anyone to accept them now? Would they be bought and sold for nonmoney goods at the formerly established exchange ratios? Obviously not. At least not as long as no legal barriers to entry into the note-production business existed; for under competitive conditions of free entry, if the (nonmoney) price paid for paper notes exceeded their production costs, the production of notes would immediately be expanded to the point at which the price of money approached its cost of production. The result would be hyperinflation. No one would accept paper money anymore, and a flight into *real values* would set in. The monetary economy would break down completely and society would revert back to a primitive, highly inefficient barter economy. Out of barter then, once again a new (most likely a gold) commodity money would emerge (and the note producers once again, so as to gain acceptability for their notes, would begin backing them by this money). What a way of achieving savings!

If one is to succeed in replacing commodity money by fiat money, then, an additional requirement must be fulfilled: Free entry into the note-production business must be restricted, and a money *monopoly* must be established. A single paper money producer is also capable of causing hyperinflation and a monetary breakdown. However, insofar as he is legally shielded from competition, a monopolist can safely and knowingly restrict the production of his notes and thus assure that they retain their purchasing power. He then presumably would assume the task of *redeeming* old notes at par for new ones, as well as that of again providing safeguarding and clearing services in accepting note deposits in exchange for his issuance of substitutes of notes—demand deposit accounts and checkbook money—against a depositing fee.

Regarding this scenario, several related questions arise. Formerly, with commodity money every person was permitted to enter the gold mining and coining business freely—in accordance with the assumption of self-interested, wealth-maximizing actors. In contrast, in order for Friedman’s “fiat money dividend” to come into existence, competition in the field of money production would have to be outlawed and a monopoly erected. Yet how can the existence of a legal monopoly be reconciled with the assumption of self-interest? Is it conceivable that self-interested actors could agree on establishing a fiat money monopoly in the same way as they can naturally agree on participating in the division of labor and on using one and the same commodity as a medium of exchange? If not, does this not demonstrate that the cost associated with such a monopoly must be considered higher than all attending resource cost savings?

To raise these questions is to answer them. Monopoly and the pursuit of self-interest are incompatible. To be sure, a reason why someone might want to become the money monopolist exists. After all, by not having to store, guard and redeem a precious commodity, the production costs would be dramatically reduced and the monopolist could thus reap an extra profit. By being legally protected from all future competition, this monopoly profit would immediately become “capitalized” (reflected permanently in an upward valuation of his assets), and on top of his inflated asset values he then would be guaranteed a normal rate of return in the form of interest. Yet to say that such an arrangement would be advantageous to the monopolist is not to say that it would be advantageous to anybody else, and hence that it could arise naturally. In fact, there is no motive for anyone wanting *anyone but himself* to be this monopolist, and accordingly no agreement on the selection of any particular monopolist would be possible. The position of a monopolist can only be arrogated—enforced against the will of all excluded nonmonopolists. By definition, a monopoly creates a distinction between two classes of individuals of different legal quality: between those—privileged—individuals who are permitted to produce money, and those—subordinate—ones who, to the exclusive advantage of the former, are prohibited from doing the same. Such an institution *cannot* be supported in the same voluntary way as the institutions of the division of labor and a commodity money. It is *not*, as they are, the “natural” result of mutually advantageous interactions, but that of an unilaterally advantageous act of expropriation (abrogation). Accordingly, instead of relying for its continued existence on voluntary support and cooperation, a monopoly requires the threat of physical violence.[^12]

Moreover, the incompatibility of self-interest and monopoly does not end once the monopoly has been established but continues as long as the monopoly remains in operation. It cannot but operate inefficiently and at the expense of the excluded nonmonopolists. First, under a regime of free competition (free entry), every single producer is under constant pressure to produce whatever he produces at minimum costs, for if he does *not* do so, he invites the risk of being outcompeted by new entrants who produce the product in question at lower costs. In contrast, a monopolist, shielded from competition, is under no such pressure. In fact, since the cost of money production includes the monopolist’s own salary as well as all of his nonmonetary rewards, a monopolist’s “natural” interest is to *raise* his costs. Hence, it should be expected that the cost of a monopolistically provided paper money would very soon, if not from the very outset, *exceed* those associated with a competitively provided commodity money.

Furthermore, it can be predicted that the price of monopolistically provided paper money will steadily increase and the purchasing power per unit money, and its quality will continuously fall. Protected from new entrants, every monopolist is always tempted to raise price and lower quality. Yet this is particularly true of a money monopolist. While other monopolists must consider the possibility that price increases (or quality decreases) due to an elastic demand for their product may actually lead to reduced revenues, a money monopolist can rest assured that the demand for his particular product—the common medium of exchange—will be highly inelastic. Indeed, short of a hyperinflation, when the demand for money disappears entirely, a money monopolist is practically always in a position in which he may assume that his revenue from the sale of money will increase even as he raises the price of money (reduces its purchasing power). Equipped with the exclusive right to produce money and under the assumption of self-interest the monopoly bank should be expected to engage in a steady increase of the money supply, for while an increased supply of paper money does not add anything to social wealth—the amount of directly useful consumer and producer goods in existence—but merely causes inflation (lowers the purchasing power of money), with each additional note brought into circulation the monopolist can increase *his* real income (at the expense of lowering that of the non-monopolistic public). He can print notes at practically zero cost and then turn around and purchase *real* assets (consumer or producer goods) or use them for the repayment of *real* debts. The real wealth of the non-bank public will be reduced—they own less goods and more money of lower purchasing power. However, the monopolist’s real wealth will increase—he owns more non-money goods (and he always has as much money as he wants). Who, in this situation, except angels, would *not* engage in a steady expansion of the money supply and hence in a continuous depreciation of the currency?

It may be instructive to contrast the theory of fiat money as outlined above to the views of Milton Friedman, as the outstanding modern champion of fiat money.

While the younger Friedman paid no systematic attention to the question of the origin of money the older Friedman recognizes that, as a matter of historical fact, all monies originated as commodity monies (and all money substitutes as warehouse claims to commodity money), and he is justly skeptical of the older Friedrich A. Hayek’s proposal of competitively issued fiat currencies.[^13] However, misled by his positivist methodology Friedman fails to grasp that money (and money substitutes) *cannot* originate in any other way and accordingly that Hayek’s proposal must fail.

In contrast to the views developed here, throughout his entire work Friedman maintains that a commodity money in turn would be “naturally” replaced by a—more efficient, resource cost saving—fiat money regime. Amazingly, however, he offers no argumentative support for this thesis, evades all theoretical problems, and whatever argument or empirical observation he does offer *contradicts* his very claim. There is, first off, no indication that Friedman is aware of the fundamental limitations of replacing outside money by inside money. Yet if outside money cannot disappear from circulation, how, except through an act of expropriation, can the link between paper and a money commodity be severed? The continued use of outside money in circulation demonstrates that it is *not* regarded as an inferior money; and the fact that expropriation is needed for the decommoditization of money would demonstrate that fiat money is *not* a natural phenomenon!

Interestingly, after evading the problem of explaining how the suspension of redeemability can possibly be considered natural or efficient, Friedman quite correctly recognizes that fiat money cannot, for the reasons given above, be provided competitively but requires a monopoly. From there he proceeds to assert that “the production of fiat currency is, as it were, a natural monopoly.”[^14] However, from the fact that fiat money requires a monopoly, it does not follow that there is anything “natural” about such a monopoly and Friedman provides no argument whatsoever as to how any monopoly can possibly be considered the natural outcome of the interactions of self-interested individuals. Moreover, the younger Friedman in particular appears to be almost completely ignorant of classical political economy and its antimonopolistic arguments: the axiom that if you give someone a privilege he will make use of it, and hence the conclusion that every monopolistic producer will be inefficient (in terms of costs as well as of price and quality). In light of these arguments it has to be regarded as breathtakingly naive on Friedman’s part first to advocate the establishment of a governmental money monopoly and then to expect this monopolist *not* to use its power, but to operate at the lowest possible costs and to inflate the money supply only gently (at a rate of 3–5 percent per year). This would assume that, along with becoming a monopolist, a fundamental transformation in the self-interested nature of mankind would take place.

Having had extensive experience with his own ideal of a world of pure fiat currencies as it came into existence after 1971 and looking back on his own central resource cost savings argument for a monopolistically provided fiat money of nearly four decades earlier, it is not surprising that the older Friedman cannot but acknowledge that his predictions turned out blatantly false.[^15] Since abolishing the last remnants of the gold commodity money standard, he realizes, inflationary tendencies have dramatically increased on a worldwide scale; the predictability of future price movements has sharply decreased; the market for long-term bonds (such as consols) has been largely wiped out; the number of investment and “hard money” advisors and the resources bound up in such businesses have drastically increased; money market funds and currency futures markets have developed and absorbed significant amounts of real resources which otherwise—without the increased inflation and unpredictability—would not have come into existence at all or at least would never have assumed the same importance that they now have; and finally it appears that even the direct resource costs devoted to the production of gold accumulated in private hoards as a hedge against inflation have increased.[^16] But what conclusion does Friedman draw from this empirical evidence? In accordance with his own positivist methodology according to which science is prediction and false predictions falsify one’s theory, one should expect that Friedman would finally discard his theory as hopelessly wrong and advocate a return to commodity money. Not so. Rather, in a remarkable display of continued ignorance (or arrogance), he emphatically concludes that none of this evidence should be interpreted as “a plea for a return to a gold standard. On the contrary I regard a return to a gold standard as neither desirable nor feasible.”[^17] Now as then he holds onto the view that the appeal of the gold standard is merely “nonrational, emotional,” and that only a fiat money is “technically efficient.”[^18] According to Friedman, what needs to be done to overcome the obvious shortcomings of the current fiat money regime is find

> some anchor to provide long-term price predictability, some substitute for convertibility into a commodity or, alternatively some device that would make predictability unnecessary. Many possible anchors and devices have been suggested, from monetary growth rules to tabular standards to the separation of the medium of exchange from the unit of account. As yet, no consensus has been reached among them.[^19]

[^9]: Mises, *The Theory of Money and Credit*, p. 111.

[^10]: See Friedman, “Essays in Positive Economics, p. 210; idem, *A Program for Monetary Stability*, pp. 4–8; idem, *Capitalism and Freedom* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), p. 40.

[^11]: Indeed, historically this has been the case: Traditionally, notes have always been widely distrusted, and their acceptability—as compared to that of genuine money such as gold or silver coins—was severely limited.

In order to increase the popularity of money substitutes two complementary measures were actually required: First, the note-issuing depositing institution had to overvalue deposit notes against genuine money by either charging no depositing fee or by even paying interest on deposits. Secondly, because the guarding of money is actually *not* costless and deposited money *cannot* possibly generate an interest return, the bank, in order to cover its otherwise unavoidable losses, had to engage in fractional reserve banking, i.e., it had to issue and bring into circulation new, additional deposit tickets that, while physically indistinguishable from any other notes, were actually not covered by genuine money.

On the ethical and economic status of the practice of fractional-reserve banking see the section, “From Deposit and Loan Banking to Fractional-Reserve Banking: The Devolution of Credit,” below.

[^12]: It might be argued that a monopoly agreement would be possible (conceivable), if the monopolistic bank of issue were owned by—and its profits distributed to—everyone. Wouldn’t everyone, then, not just the monopolist, profit from the savings of substituting paper for gold?

In fact, such an agreement is illusionary. Joint ownership of the monopoly bank would imply that tradeable stock certificates must be issued and distributed. But who should get how much stock? Bank clients, according to their deposit size? Yet all private holders of notes help save on gold and would want to be included among the bank owners according to the size of their note holdings. What about the owners and sellers of nonmoney goods? In showing themselves willing to accept paper instead of gold, they, too, play their part in the resource cost savings. But how in the world is one to determine how many shares to award *them* when their contribution consists, as it does, of various quantities of heterogeneous consumer and producer goods? Here, at the very latest it would become impossible to reach agreement.

Moreover, why would any new market participant—any later deposit, note and/or nonmoney good owner *not* initially endowed with bank stock—want to consent to and support this arrangement? Why should he *pay* for banking stock, while it was distributed to the initial wealth owners free of charge, even though he is now involved in resource cost savings just as much as they were then? Such an arrangement would involve a systematic redistribution of income and wealth in favor of all initial wealth owners and at the expense of all later ones. Yet if new additional bank stock were issued for each new deposit, note, or nonmoney good owner, such stock would be worthless from the outset and any bank offering it would be a nonstarter.

In addition, as will be explained below, regardless of how the ownership problem is resolved, the very operation of the bank will—indeed *must*—have effects on the interpersonal income and wealth distribution.

[^13]: See Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?” *Journal of Monetary Economics* (1986); for Hayek’s proposal see his *Denationalization of Money* (London: Institute of Economic Affairs, 1976).

[^14]: See Friedman, *Essays in Positive Economics*, p. 216; also Friedman and Schwartz, “Has Government Any Role in Money?”

[^15]: Milton Friedman, “The Resource Cost of Irredeemable Paper Money,” *Journal of Political Economy* (1986).

[^16]: Monetarists had predicted that, as the result of the demonetization of gold and the transition to a pure fiat money system, the price of gold would fall—from the then official rate of $35 per ounce to an estimated nonmonetary value of gold of around $6\. In fact, the price of gold rose. At one point it reached $850 per ounce, and for most of the time it has lingered between $300 and $400\. As of this writing the price is $375.

[^17]: Friedman, “The Resource Cost of Irredeemable Paper Money,” p. 648.

[^18]: Friedman, *Essays in Positive Economics*, p. 250.

[^19]: Friedman, “The Resource Cost of Irredeemable Paper Money,” p. 646; also idem, *Money Mischief Episodes in Monetary History* (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992), chap. 10.

::::Among the suggestions for an alternative fiat money “anchor” recently considered by Friedman, the “frozen monetary base rule” deserves a brief comment (see Friedman, “Monetary Policy for the 1980s” in *To Promote Prosperity*, John H. Moore, ed. [Stanford: Hoover Institution, 1984]). In one respect this rule represents an advance over his earlier 3 to 5 percent monetary growth rule. His advocacy of the latter rule was based essentially on the erroneous proto-Keynesian notion that money constitutes part of social capital, such that an economy cannot grow by 5 percent unless it is accommodated to do so by a proportional increase in the money supply. In contrast, the frozen monetary base rule indicates a recognition of the old Humean insight that any supply of money is equally optimal or, in Friedman’s own words, that money’s “usefulness to the community as a whole does not depend on how much money there is (Friedman, *Money Mischief*, p. 28). Otherwise, the proposal represents no advance at all, for how in the world can a monopolist be expected to follow a frozen monetary base rule any more than a less stringent 3 to 5 percent growth rule?

::::Moreover, even if this problem were solved miraculously, this would still not alter the monopoly’s character as an instrument of unilateral expropriation and income and wealth redistribution. The monopolist, apart from offering depositing and clearing services (for which his customers would pay him a fee), would also have to perform the function, for customers and noncustomers alike, of replacing old, worn-out notes—one-to-one and free of charge—with new, identical ones (otherwise, who would want to replace a permanent commodity money by a perishable fiat money?). However, while the costs associated with this task may be low, they are definitely not zero. Accordingly, in order to avoid losses and recoup his expenses, the monopolist cannot but *increase* the monetary base—and hence one would essentially be back at the older monetary growth rule.