## Ang mas mahirap na pagsubok ng UPB

Ngayon ay nasubukan natin ang tiyak na moral na teyorya na relatibo sa balangkas ng UPB, at malalaman na ang UPB ay winawasto ang karamihan sa ating karaniwang hinahawakan ang moral na paniniwala, katulad ng sa pagbabawal laban sa panggagahasa, pagpatay at pagnanakaw. Sa pamamagitan ng pagdadala ng pamantayan ng *pag-iiwas* sa ating pagsusuri, tayo ay nakatulong upang maikumpara ang mga krimen na hindi maiiwasan, at ang mga krimen ay dapat magawa sa pamamagitan ng positibong aksyon, katulad ng pandaraya. Panghuli, nahati namin ang "kanais-nais na paguugali" sa tatlong pangunahing kategorya - makamundo, estetik, at walang kinikilingan (at ang kanilang kaugnay na kasalungat). Makamundong pinagbabawal na kilos kabilang ang panggagahasa, pagpatay at pagnanakay, na kung saan ang puwersa ay maaaring gamitin upang maiwasan ito. Estetik na kanais-nais na kilos kabilang ang pagkamagalang, laging nasa oras at kung anu-ano pa, na kung saan ay hindi maaaring ipatupad sa pamamagitan ng karahasan. Ang walang kinikilingan na mga kilos kabilang ang pulos na subhektibong kagustuhan, o mga kilos na walang moral na nilalaman, katulad ng sa pagtakbo para sa bus.

Gayunman, nanatiling maraming mahirap na pagsubok ng moral na napupunta sa labas ng mga halimbawa natin na kailangan natin aksyunan sa itaas. Tayo lamang ang haharap sa ilang tao dito, upang tignan ang balangkas ng UPB, at makita kung paano nito hinaharap ang mas mahihiral na tanong ng moral.

### Ang Pagtatanggol sa Sarili

Ang konsepto ng pagtatanggol ay hindi dapat binabaliwala. Kung ipapalagay natin na walang ganoong bagay na pagtatanggol sa sarili, o ang pagtatanggol sa sarili ay hindi isang wastong kilos, sa gayon ang balangkas ng UPB binabalik sa dati ang palagay ng mabilis.

Kung walang ganoong bagay katulad ng pagtatanggol sa sarili, sa gayon hindi kami nag-uusap tungkol sa pagpapanimula o ang paghihiganti ng paggamit ng puwersa, ngunit sa halip ay gumamit na lamang ng puwersa sa anumang konteksto. Sa madaling salita, kung aalisin natin ang konsepto ng pagtatanggol sa sarili, ang tanging tanong na kailangan natin itanong sa ating sarili ay: * ito ang makamundong kanais-nais na gumamit ng puwersa, o hindi?*

Kung ito ay makamundong kanais-nais na gumamit ng puwersa, sa gayon walang nilalang ang dapat mauna sa moral na argumento, ngunit sa halip ay gumamit ng puwersa upang makuha ang kanyang layunin. Gayunman, tulad ng sa panggagahasa, ang pagnanakaw at pagpatay ay mga halimbawa na nabanggit sa itaas, ang pagsasabi na ito ay isang makamundong kanais-nais na gumamit ng puwersa agad ay hindi winawasto ang kanyang sarili. Upang magamit ang puwersa sa ibang tao nangangailangan na ang isang tao ay magsumite ng puwersa - sa madaling salita, upang ang isang tao ay maging moral, ang ibang tao ay dapat maging imoral, at hindi maaaring makatayo. Gayundin, kung ang ibang tao *ay magpapasakop* sa puwersa, ito ay hindi puwersa - kaya dapat niya *labanan*, na kung saan nangangailangan na labanan niya ang kabutihan upang paganahin ang kabutihan, na kung saan ito ay sariling pagsasalungat.

Sa pagdadagdag, kung ito ay laging kanais-nais na gumamit ng puwersa, sa gayon ang mga krimen katulad ng panggagahasa at pagpatay ay magiging walang kaugnayan, dahil ito ay laging kanais-nais na gumamit ng puwersa, sa gayon ang pakikipagtalik ay magiging imoral, at ang panggagahas ay magiging moral - ngunit para sa mga nanggagahasa, habang *nagpapasakop * sa karahasaan, sa halip ay sa mismong karahasan, ay magiging moral para sa biktima, na kung saan ay isang pagsasalungat.

Kung, sa kabilang banda, nasasabi natin na ang karahasan ay masama, sa gayon binubuksan natin ang posibilidad ng pagtatanggol sa sarili kung ang isang UPB na reklamamong pahayag ay nagsasabi na ang karahasan ay masamna, alam natin ito, dahil sa ang kasamaan ay maaaring maiwasan sa pamamagitan ng paggamit ng karahasan, ang paggamit ng karahasan sa *pagpigil* ng karaharasan ay moral na wasto.

Kaya naman, dahil alam natin na ang karahasan ay masama, alam natin na maaari tayong gumamit ng puwersa upang pigilin ito. Kung ating bibigyang kahulugan ang isang kilos bilang masama, at pigilan din natin ang sinuman sa paggawa laban dito, tayo ay hindi na mga moral na pilosopo, kung hindi ay pangkaraniwang mapanghusgang arkeologo. Ito ay magiging katulad sa isang medikal na teyorya na nagsabi na ang karamdaman ay hindi mabuti, ngunit ang masama ay ang subukang pigilan o pagalingin ito - kung saan walang kahulugan kahit ano pa man.

Gayundin, kung ang mga tayo ay hindi kayang kumilos ng wasto upang maiwasang ang pinsala sa kanilang mga sarili, kung gayon ang mga kilos tulad ng pagbabakuna, pagsusuot ng guwantes sa lamig, paglalagay ng sanskrin o panlaban sa insekto, pagtatayo ng pader upang maiwasan ang pagguho ng lupa, pagsisipilyo ng ngipin, pagsusuot ng sapatos at kung anu-ano pa ay imoral na kilos lahat. Kung tayo ay babalik kay Bob at Doug, at bibigyan natin sila ng moral na argumento na ang pagtatanggol sa sarili ay laging mali, ano ang magiging resulta nito?

Sa gayon, makabubuo tayo ng isang kabalintunaan. Ang pagtatanggol sa sarili ay ang paggamit ng karahasan upang maiwasan ang isa pang karahasan. Kung ang pagtatanggol sa sarili ay mali, kung gayon hindi ito karahasang "makakapaminsala" sa taong namiminsala. Gayunman, ang kagustuhan na hindi maaaring makapaminsala sa iba ay nasa ilalim ng APA o walang kinikilingang moral na kategorya. Para ilagay ang karahasan ng pagtatanggol sa sarili sa mga kategoryang ito ay masasabi na ang karahasan ay hindi maaaring makapinsala sa iba - pero ang mismong kalikasan ng karahasan na ito *ay* makakapinsala sa iba, at kaya ang pamamaraang ito ay nagreresulta sa kalabisan ng pagsasalungatan.

Ang pagtatanggol sa sarili ay hindi maaaring "masama," dahil ang kahulugan ng masama ay mapipigilan sa pamamagitan ng puwersa. Subalit, ang pagtatanggol sa sarili ay isang tugon sa pagpapasimula ng puwersa, at sa gayon ay hindi maaaring pigilan sa pamamagitan ng puwersa, higit pa sa kaya mong pagpigil sa galaw ng bola ng soccer nang sipain ito ng marahas.

Self-defence also cannot be *required* behaviour, since required behaviour (“don’t rape”) can be enforced through violence, which would mean that anyone failing to violently defend himself could be legitimately aggressed against. However, someone failing to defend himself is *already* being aggressed against, and so we end up in a circular situation where everyone can legitimately act violently against a person who is not defending himself, which is not only illogical, but morally abhorrent.

If Bob attacks Doug, but it is completely wrong for Doug to use violence to defend himself, then violence ends up being placed into two moral categories – the initiation of force is morally good, but self-defence is morally evil, which cannot stand according to UPB.

However, you might argue, does not the proposition that self-defence is good also make violence both good and bad at the same time – the violence that is used to attack is bad, but the violence that is used for self-defence is good?

This is an interesting objection – however, if the initiation of force is evil, then it can be prohibited by using force, since that is one of the very definitions of evil that we worked out above.

Thus it is impossible for any logical moral theory to reject the moral validity of self-defence.

### Child Raising

Instinctively, we generally understand that there is something quite wrong with parents who do not feed their babies. To conceive a child, carry a child to term, give birth to the child, and then leave it lying in its crib to starve to death, severely offends our sensibilities.

Of course, our offence is in no way a moral argument, but it is an excellent starting place to test a moral theory.

Before, when we were talking about UPB, we noted that, where there are exceptions in UPB, there must be objective differences in biology. Or, to put it more accurately, where there are objective differences in biology, there may be rational exceptions or differences in UPB. A child of five has a biologically immature brain and nervous system, and thus cannot rationally process the long-term consequences of his actions. It is the immature brain that is the key here, insofar as if an adult male is retarded to the point where his brain is the equivalent to that of a five year old, he would also have a reduced responsibility for his actions.

Thus when we point to situations of reduced responsibility, we are not *taking away* responsibility that exists, but rather recognising a situation where responsibility does not exist, at least to some degree. If I say that a man in a wheelchair cannot take the escalator, I am not taking away his right to take the escalator, but merely pointing out that he cannot, in fact, use it. When I say that UPB does not apply to the actions of a five year old, I am not saying that UPB is subjective, any more than a height requirement for a roller coaster somehow makes the concept of “tall” subjective.

If I voluntarily enter into a contract with you wherein I promise to pay your bills for a year, I have not signed myself into slavery, but I certainly have taken on a positive obligation that I am now responsible for.

If I run a nursing home, and I take in patients who are unable to feed themselves, then if I do not feed those patients, I am responsible for their resulting deaths. No one is *forcing* me to take in these patients, but once I have expressed a desire and a willingness to take care of them, then I am responsible for their continued well-being.

In the same way, if I borrow your lawnmower, I am obligated to bring it back in more or less the same state that it was when I borrowed it. Similarly, if I go to a pet store and buy a dog, I have taken on a voluntary obligation to take care of that dog. This does not mean that I am now the dog’s slave until the day it dies, but it does mean that as long as the dog is in my possession, I have a responsibility to try to keep it healthy.

These kinds of implicit contracts are quite common in life. We do not sign a contract with a restaurateur when we go to eat a meal in his restaurant; it is simply understood that we will pay before we leave. I have never signed a contract when I walk into a store promising not to shoplift, but they have the right to prosecute me if I do. I also have never signed a contract promising not to rape a woman if we go on a date, yet such a “contract” certainly exists, according to UPB.

If I run a nursing home, and disabled people rely on me to feed them, if I prove unable to feed them for some reason, then my responsibility is clearly to find somebody else who will feed them. The grave danger is not that *I* don’t feed them, but rather that everyone else thinks that I *am* feeding them, and so do not provide them food. This accords with an old moral argument about diving into a river to save someone from drowning. I am not obligated to dive into a river to save someone from drowning, but the moment that I do – or state my intention openly – then I am responsible for trying to save that person, for the very practical reason that everyone else thinks that I am going to save that person, and so may not take direct action themselves.

Thus it is assumed that parents will feed and take care of their newborn baby. If said parents decide against such care-giving, then they are obligated to give the child up to other people who *will* care for it, or face the charge of murder, just as the manager of a home for the disabled must either feed those who utterly depend on him, or give them up to someone who will. If I decide that I no longer want to take care of my dog, I must find him another home, not simply let him starve to death.

This all relies on the principle of third-party self-defence, which is fully supported by the framework of UPB, since the right of self-defence is universal. If I see a man in a wheelchair being attacked by a woman, I have the right to defend him – and this is all the more true if he lacks the capacity to defend himself.

Since children cannot feed themselves, earn a living or live independently, they are the moral equivalent of kidnap victims, or the wife we talked about before whose husband locked her in the basement. Children also lack the capacity for effective self-defence, due to their small stature and near-complete dependence upon their parents.

Thus since it is certainly the case that we have the right to act in self-defence for someone else – and that right becomes even stronger if that person cannot act in his own self-defence, it is perfectly valid to use force against parents who do not feed their children, just as it is perfectly valid to use force against the husband who is starving his wife to death by locking her in the basement.

As we also mentioned above, the less able a victim is to avoid the situation, the worse the crime is. Even the wife who ends up locked in the basement has at least *some* ownership in the matter, because she chose to marry this evil lunatic to begin with. Once she is locked in the basement, the situation is unavoidable, yet there were doubtless many clues hinting at her husband’s abusive nature, from the day she first met him.

Children, however, are the ultimate victims, because they never had any chance to avoid the situations they find themselves in. Thus we can logically establish the responsibility of parents towards their children by using the UPB framework. Since every person is responsible for the effects of his or her body, and children are an effect of the body, then parents are responsible for their children. Since everyone has the right to self-defence, for themselves and for others – since it is a universal right – then anyone can act to defend children. Since everyone must fulfil voluntary obligations, and having children is a voluntary obligation, parents must fulfil those obligations related to children. Since, through inaction, causing the death of someone completely dependent upon you is the equivalent of murder, parents are liable for such a crime.

We could of course put forward the proposition that parents do not have to take care of their children, but that is far too specific a principle to be a moral premise – it would be the same as saying “parents can murder,” which is not UPB-compliant, and so would require a biological differentiation to support an exception – and becoming a parent does not utterly overturn and reverse one’s biological nature.

Parents who starve a child to death are clearly guilty of murder. Children are born into this world in a state of involuntary imprisonment within the family – this does not mean that the family is evil, or corrupt – it is simply a statement of biological fact. Children are by the parents’ choice enslaved to the parents – this form of biological incarceration puts negligent parents in the same moral position as a kidnapper who allows his captive to starve to death, or a nurse who lets her utterly-dependent patients die of thirst.