## Fallacies of the Public Goods Theory and the Production of Security

In 1849, when traditional progressivism was as yet the overwhelming ideological power and "market analyst" and "communist" were for the most part thought about antonyms, Gustave de Molinari, a prestigious Belgian financial expert, composed,

> On the off chance that there is one settled truth in political economy, it is this: That in all cases, of all wares that serve to accommodate the unmistakable or impalpable need of the customer, it is in the shopper's best advantage that work and exchange stay free, in light of the fact that the opportunity of work and exchange have as their essential and lasting outcome the most extreme decrease of cost. What's more, this: That the enthusiasm of the purchaser of any product at all ought to dependably beat the interests of the maker. Presently, in seeking after these standards, one touches base at this thorough conclusion: That the generation of security ought to in light of a legitimate concern for shoppers of this immaterial ware stay subject to the law of free rivalry. Whence it takes after: That no administration ought to have the privilege to keep another legislature from going into rivalry with it, or require customers of security to come solely to it for this product.[^1]

He remarks on this entire contention by saying, "Either this is consistent and genuine, or else the standards on which monetary science is based are invalid."[^2]

There is clearly just a single way out of this unsavory (for all communists, that is) conclusion: to contend that there are specific merchandise to which for some uncommon reasons the above monetary thinking does not have any significant bearing. It is this that the purported open merchandise scholars are resolved to demonstrate.[^3] In any case, I will exhibit that in actuality no such unique merchandise or extraordinary reasons exist, and that the creation of security specifically does not represent an issue any not quite the same as that of the generation of some other great or administration, be it houses, cheddar, or protection. Disregarding its numerous adherents, the entire open merchandise hypothesis is defective, garish thinking, loaded with inner irregularities, nonsensical conclusions, engaging and playing on well known preferences and expected convictions, yet with no logical legitimacy at all.[^4]

What, at that point, does the escape course that communist business analysts have found so as to abstain from making Molinari's determination resemble? Since Molinari's opportunity it has turned out to be more typical to answer yes to the subject of whether there are merchandise to which diverse sorts of monetary investigations apply. Indeed, it is relatively difficult to locate a solitary contemporary financial matters course reading that does not pressure the crucial significance of the refinement between private merchandise, for which reality of the monetary predominance of an entrepreneur request of creation is by and large conceded, and open products, for which it is for the most part denied.[^5] Certain merchandise or administrations (counting security) are said to be uncommon in light of the fact that their delight can't be confined to the individuals who have really financed their creation. Or maybe, individuals who don't take an interest in financing them likewise draw profits by them. Such products are called open merchandise or administrations (rather than private products or administrations, which only advantage those individuals who really pay for them). In light of this extraordinary component of open merchandise, it is contended, markets can't deliver them, or if nothing else not in adequate amount or quality; henceforth, compensatory state activity is required.[^6]

The illustrations given by various creators of affirmed open merchandise change broadly. Creators regularly group a similar decent or administration in an unexpected way, leaving no arrangement of a specific decent undisputed, which obviously foretells the fanciful character of the entire distinction.[^7] Nonetheless, a few cases that appreciate especially prevalent status as open merchandise are the fire unit that prevents a neighbor's home from discovering fire, in this manner giving him a chance to benefit from my fire detachment, despite the fact that he didn't contribute anything to financing it; or the police that, by strolling around my property frighten off potential robbers from my neighbor's property too, regardless of whether he didn't help fund the watches; or the beacon, a case especially dear to economists,[^8] that enables a ship to discover its direction despite the fact that the ship's proprietor did not contribute a penny to its development or upkeep.

Before proceeding with the introduction and basic examination of the hypothesis of open products, I will explore how valuable the qualification amongst private and open merchandise is in choosing what ought to be delivered secretly and what ought to be furnished by the state or with state help. Indeed, even the most shallow examination couldn't neglect to bring up that utilizing the asserted paradigm of inexcludability, as opposed to exhibiting a sensible arrangement, would get one into major dilemma. While in any event at first look it appears that a portion of the stateprovided merchandise and ventures may surely qualify as open products, it unquestionably isn't clear what number of the merchandise and enterprises that are really created by states could go under the heading of open merchandise. Railways, postal administrations, phone, lanes, and so forth appear to be products whose utilization can be confined to the people who really back them, and consequently give off an impression of being private merchandise. What's more, the same is by all accounts the case with respect to numerous parts of the multidimensional great "security": everything for which protection could be taken out would need to qualify as a private decent. However this does not get the job done. Similarly the same number of state-if merchandise have all the earmarks of being private products, such huge numbers of secretly delivered merchandise appear to fit in the classification of an open decent. Obviously my neighbors would benefit from my wellkept rose garden—they could appreciate seeing it while never helping me plant. The same is valid for a wide range of upgrades that I could make on my property that would improve the benefit of neighboring property too. Indeed, even those individuals who don't toss cash in his cap can benefit from a road performer's execution. Those kindred travelers on the transport who did not enable me to get it benefit from my antiperspirant. What's more, everybody who ever meets me would benefit from my endeavors, embraced without their money related help, to transform myself into a most adorable individual. Presently, do every one of these products—rose greenery enclosures, property changes, road music, antiperspirants, individual upgrades—since they obviously appear to have the qualities of open merchandise, at that point must be furnished by the state or with state help?

As these cases of secretly created open merchandise demonstrate, there is something truly amiss with the theory of open products scholars that open products can't be delivered secretly, yet rather require state intercession. Obviously they can be given by business sectors. Moreover, authentic confirmation demonstrates to us that the greater part of the alleged open products that states now give have sooner or later in the past really been given by private business visionaries or even today are so given in some nation. For instance, the postal administration was once private all over the place; boulevards were secretly financed and still are some of the time; even the dearest beacons were initially the aftereffect of private enterprise;[^9] private police powers, criminologists, and referees exist; and help for the wiped out, poor people, the elderly, vagrants, and dowagers has been a conventional worry of private philanthropy associations. To state, at that point, that such things can't be created by an unadulterated market framework is adulterated by encounter a hundredfold.

Aside from this, different troubles emerge when general society private merchandise qualification is utilized to choose what and what not to leave to the market. For example, imagine a scenario where the generation of purported open products did not have constructive but rather had contrary outcomes for other individuals, or if the results were sure for a few and negative for others. Imagine a scenario where the neighbor whose house was spared from consuming by my fire detachment had wished (maybe in light of the fact that he was overinsured) that it had burned to the ground; or my neighbors despise roses, or my kindred travelers discover the aroma of my antiperspirant disturbing. What's more, changes in the innovation can change the character of a given decent. For instance, with the advancement of satellite TV a decent that was previously (apparently) open has turned out to be private. What's more, changes in the laws of property—of the apportionment of property—can have the exceptionally same impact of changing people in general private character of a decent. The beacon, for example, is an open decent just seeing that the ocean is freely (not secretly) possessed. Be that as it may, on the off chance that it were allowed to secure bits of the sea as private property, as it would be in an absolutely entrepreneur social request, at that point as the beacon sparkles over just a constrained region, it would obviously end up conceivable to reject nonpayers from the satisfaction in its administrations.

Leaving this to some degree scrappy level of talk and investigating the qualification amongst private and open merchandise all the more altogether, we find that the refinement ends up being totally fanciful. An obvious division amongst private and open products does not exist, and this is basically why there can be such a large number of contradictions on the best way to arrange a given decent. All merchandise are pretty much private or open and can—and continually do—change concerning their level of privateness/freeness as individuals' esteems and assessments change, and as changes happen in the sythesis of the populace. To perceive that they never fall, for the last time, into possibly either classification, one should just review what makes something a decent. For a remark a decent it must be perceived and regarded as rare by somebody. Something isn't a decent all things considered, in other words; products are merchandise just according to the onlooker. Nothing is a decent unless no less than one individual subjectively assesses it accordingly. Be that as it may, at that point, when merchandise are never products all things considered—when no physico-concoction examination can distinguish something as a financial decent—there is plainly no settled, target measure for grouping products as either private or open. They can never be private or open merchandise all things considered. Their private or open character relies upon what a limited number of or what number of individuals view them as products, with how much they are private or open changing as these assessments change and range from one to unendingness. Indeed, even apparently totally private things like the inside of my condo or the shade of my clothing would thus be able to end up open merchandise when another person begins thinking about them.[^10] And apparently open products, similar to the outside of my home or the shade of my overalls, can turn out to be to a great degree private merchandise when other individuals quit thinking about them. In addition, each great can change its qualities over and over; it can even abandon an open or private great to an open or private awful or shrewdness and the other way around, depending exclusively on the adjustments in this minding or wanton. In the event that this is along these lines, at that point no choice at all can be founded on the characterization of merchandise as private or public.[^11] actually, to do as such it would end up important to ask practically every person as for each and every great regardless of whether he happened to think about it—decidedly or adversely and maybe to what degree—keeping in mind the end goal to figure out who may benefit from what and who ought to accordingly take an interest in the great's financing. (What's more, how might one know whether they were coming clean?) It would likewise end up important to screen all progressions in such assessments persistently, with the outcome that no unequivocal choice would ever be made in regards to the creation of anything, and as a result of an illogical hypothesis every one of us would be long dead.[^12]

However, regardless of whether one were to overlook every one of these troubles and were ready to concede, for contention that the private-open great refinement holds water, the contention would not demonstrate what it should. It neither gives indisputable reasons why open products—expecting that they exist as a different classification of merchandise—ought to be delivered by any means, nor why the state as opposed to private endeavors should create them. This is the thing that the hypothesis of open merchandise basically says, having presented the previously mentioned theoretical refinement: The constructive outcomes of open merchandise for individuals who don't contribute anything to their generation or financing demonstrates that these products are alluring. In any case, obviously they would not be created, or if nothing else not in adequate amount and quality, in a free, aggressive market, since not those who might benefit from their generation would likewise contribute monetarily to make the creation conceivable. So as to deliver these merchandise (which are obviously alluring, yet would not be created something else), the state must hop in and aid their generation. This kind of thinking, which can be found in relatively every reading material on financial aspects (Nobel laureates not excluded)[^13] is totally deceptive on two tallies.

For one thing, to come to the conclusion that the state has to provide public goods that otherwise would not be produced, one must smuggle a norm into one’s chain of reasoning. Otherwise, from the statement that because of some special characteristics they have, certain goods would not be produced, one could never reach the conclusion that these goods *should* be produced. But with a norm required to justify their conclusion, the public goods theorists clearly have left the bounds of economics as a positive, *wertfrei* science. Instead they have moved into the realm of morals or ethics, and hence one would expect to be offered a theory of ethics as a cognitive discipline in order for them to do legitimately what they are doing and to justifiably derive their conclusion. But it can hardly be stressed enough that nowhere in public goods theory literature can anything that even faintly resembles such a cognitive theory of ethics be found.[^14] Thus it must be stated at the outset, that public goods theorists are misusing whatever prestige they might have as positive economists for pronouncements on matters on which, as their own writings indicate, they have no authority whatsoever. Perhaps, though, they have stumbled on something correct by accident, without having supported it with an elaborate moral theory? It becomes apparent that nothing could be further from the truth as soon as one explicitly formulates the norm that would be needed to arrive at the conclusion that the state has to assist in the provision of public goods. The norm required to reach the above conclusion is this: whenever one can somehow prove that the production of a particular good or service has a positive effect on someone else but would not be produced at all or would not be produced in a definite quantity or quality unless certain people participated in its financing, then the use of aggressive violence against these persons is allowed, either directly or indirectly with the help of the state, and these persons may be forced to share in the necessary financial burden. It does not need much comment to show that chaos would result from implementing this rule, as it amounts to saying that anyone can attack anyone else whenever he feels like it. Moreover, as I have demonstrated in detail elsewhere[^15] this norm could never be justified as a fair norm. To argue so, in fact to argue at all, in favor of or against anything, be it a moral, nonmoral, empirical, or logico-analytical position, it must be presupposed that contrary to what the norm actually says, each individual’s integrity as a physically independent decision-making unit is assured. For only if everyone is free from physical aggression by everyone else could anything first be said and then agreement or disagreement on anything possibly be reached. The principle of nonaggression is thus the necessary precondition for argumentation and possible agreement and hence can be argumentatively defended as a just norm by means of a priori reasoning.

[^1]: Gustave de Molinari, *The Production of Security*, trans. J. Huston McCulloch (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 2, 1977), p. 3.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 4.

[^3]: For various approaches of public goods theorists, see James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock, *The Calculus of Consent* (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962); James M. Buchanan, *The Public Finances* (Homewood, Ill.: Richard Irwin, 1970); idem, *The Limits of Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975); Gordon Tullock, *Private Wants, Public Means* (New York: Basic Books, 1970); Mancur Olson, *The Logic of Collective Action* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965); William J. Baumol, *Welfare Economics and the Theory of the State* (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1952).

[^4]: See on the following, Murray N. Rothbard, *Man, Economy, and State* (Los Angeles: Nash, 1970), pp. 883ff.; idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” *Cato Journal* (1981); Walter Block, “Free Market Transportation: Denationalizing the Roads,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 3, no. 2 (1979); idem, “Public Goods and Externalities: The Case of Roads,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 7, no. 1 (1983).

[^5]: See for instance, William J. Baumol and Alan S. Blinder, *Economics, Principles and Policy* (New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1979), chap. 31.

[^6]: Another frequently used criterion for public goods is that of “nonrivalrous consumption.” Generally, both criteria seem to coincide: When free riders cannot be excluded, nonrivalrous consumption is possible; and when they can be excluded, consumption becomes rivalrous, or so it seems. However, as public goods theorists argue, this coincidence is not perfect. It is, they say, conceivable that while the exclusion of free riders might be possible, their inclusion might not be connected with any additional cost (the marginal cost of admitting free riders is zero, that is), and that the consumption of the good in question by the additionally admitted free rider will not necessarily lead to a subtraction in the consumption of the good available to others. Such a good would be a public good, too. And since exclusion would be practiced on the free market and the good would not become available for nonrivalrous consumption to everyone it otherwise could—even though this would require no additional costs—this, according to statist-socialist logic, would prove a market failure, i.e., a suboptimal level of consumption. Hence the state would have to take over the provision of such goods. (A movie theater, for instance, might be only half full, so it might be “costless” to admit additional viewers free of charge, and their watching the movie also might not affect the paying viewers; hence the movie would qualify as a public good. Since, however, the owner of the theater would be engaging in exclusion, instead of letting free riders enjoy a “costless” performance, movie theaters would be ripe for nationalization.) On the numerous fallacies involved in defining public goods in terms of nonrivalrous consumption see notes 12 and 17 below.

[^7]: On this subject Walter Block, “Public Goods and Externalities.”

[^8]: See for instance Buchanan, *The Public Finances*, p. 23; Paul Samuelson, *Economics* (New York: McGraw Hill, 1976), p. 166.

[^9]: See Ronald Coase, “The Lighthouse in Economics,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 17 (1974).

[^10]: See, for instance, the ironic case that Block makes for socks being public goods in “Public Goods and Externalities.”

[^11]: To avoid any misunderstanding here, every single producer and every association of producers making joint decisions can, at any time, decide whether or not to produce a good based on an evaluation of the privateness or publicness of the good. In fact, decisions on whether or not to produce public goods privately are constantly made within the framework of a market economy. What is impossible is to decide whether or not to ignore the outcome of the operation of a free market based on the assessment of the degree of privateness or publicness of a good.

[^12]: In fact, then, the introduction of the distinction between private and public goods is a relapse into the pre-subjectivist era of economics. From the point of view of subjectivist economics, no good exists that can be categorized objectively as private or public. This is essentially why the second proposed criterion for public goods—permitting nonrivalrous consumption (see note 6 above)—breaks down too. For how could any outside observer determine whether or not the admittance of an additional free rider at no charge would not indeed lead to a subtraction in the consumption of a good to others? Clearly there is no way that he could objectively do so. In fact, it might well be that one’s enjoyment of a movie or of driving on a road would be considerably reduced if more people were allowed in the theater or on the road. Again, to find out whether or not this is the case one would have to ask every individual—and not everyone might agree (what then?). Furthermore, since even a good that allows nonrivalrous consumption is not a free good, as a consequence of admitting additional free riders “crowding” would eventually occur, and hence everyone would have to be asked about the appropriate “margin.” In addition, my consumption may or may not be affected depending on who it is that is admitted free of charge, so I would have to be asked about this, too. And finally, everyone might change his opinion on all of these questions over time. It is thus in the same way impossible to decide whether or not a good is a candidate for state (rather than private) production based on the criterion of nonrivalrous consumption as on that of nonexcludability (see also note 17 below).

[^13]: See Paul Samuelson, “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” *Review of Economics and Statistics* (1954); idem, *Economics*, chap. 8; Milton Friedman, *Capitalism and Freedom* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), chap. 2; F.A. Hayek, *Law, Legislation and Liberty* (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1979), vol. 3, chap. 14.

[^14]: Economists in recent years, particularly the Chicago School, have been increasingly concerned with the analysis of property rights. Harold Demsetz, “The Exchange and Enforcement of Property Rights,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 7 (1964); idem, “Toward a Theory of Property Rights,” *American Economic Review* (1967); Ronald Coase, “The Problem of Social Cost,” *Journal of Law and Economics* 3 (1960); Armen Alchian, *Economic Forces at Work* (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1977), part 2; Richard Posner, *Economic Analysis of the Law* (Boston: Brown, 1977). Such analyses, however, have nothing to do with ethics. On the contrary, they represent attempts to substitute economic efficiency considerations for the establishment of justifiable ethical principles [on the critique of such endeavors see Murray N. Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty* (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982), chap. 26; Walter Block, “Coase and Demsetz on Private Property Rights,” *Journal of Libertarian Studies* 1, no. 2 (1977); Ronald Dworkin, “Is Wealth a Value,” *Journal of Legal Studies* 9 (1980); Murray N. Rothbard, “The Myth of Efficiency,” in Mario Rizzo, ed., *Time Uncertainty and Disequilibrium* (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1979). Ultimately, all efficiency arguments are irrelevant because there simply exists no nonarbitrary way of measuring, weighing, and aggregating individual utilities or disutilities that result from some given allocation of property rights. Hence any attempt to recommend some particular system of assigning property rights in terms of its alleged maximization of “social welfare” is pseudo-scientific humbug. See in particular, Murray N. Rothbard, *Toward a Reconstruction of Utility and Welfare Economics* (New York: Center for Libertarian Studies, Occasional Paper Series No. 3, 1977); also Lionel Robbins, “Economics and Political Economy,” *American Economic Review* (1981).

The “Unanimity Principle” which Buchanan and Tullock, following Knut Wicksell (*Finanztheoretische Untersuchungen*, Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1896), have repeatedly proposed as a guide for economic policy is also not to be confused with an ethical principle proper. According to this principle only such policy changes should be enacted which can find unanimous consent—and that surely sounds attractive; but then, *mutatis mutandis*, it also determines that the status quo be preserved if there is less than unanimous agreement on any proposal of change—and that sounds far less attractive, because it implies that any given, present state of affairs regarding the allocation of property rights must be legitimate either as a point of departure or as a to-be-continued-state. However, the public choice theorists offer no justification in terms of a normative theory of property rights for this daring claim as would be required. Hence, the unanimity principle is ultimately without ethical foundation. In fact, because it would legitimize any conceivable status quo, the Buchananites’ most favored principle is no less than outrightly absurd as a moral criterion. See on this also Rothbard, *The Ethics of Liberty* chap. 26; idem, “The Myth of Neutral Taxation,” pp. 549f.

Whatever might still be left for the unanimity principle, Buchanan and Tullock, following the lead of Wicksell again, then give away by reducing it in effect to one of “relative” or “quasi” unanimity.

[^15]: Hans-Hermann Hoppe, “From the Economics of Laissez Faire to the Ethics of Libertarianism,” in Walter Block and Llewellyn H. Rockwell, Jr., eds., *Man, Economy, and Liberty: Essays in Honor of Murray N. Rothbard* (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988); infra chap. 8.
